Broadcasting Information via Display Names in Instant Messaging
ABSTRACT
Many instant messenger (IM) clients let a person specify  the 
identifying  name that appears in another person's contact list. 
We have noticed that many people add extra information to this 
name as a way to broadcast information to their contacts. 
Twelve IM contact lists  comprising 444 individuals  were 
monitored over three weeks  to  observe  how  these individuals 
used and altered  their  display names.  Almost half of them 
changed their display names at varying frequencies, where the 
new information fell into seventeen different categories  of 
communication supplied to others. Three themes encompass 
these categories:  Identification ("who am I"?),  Information 
About Self ("this is what is going on with me") and Broadcast 
Message ("I am directing information to the community").  The 
design implication is that systems supporting person to person 
casual interaction, such as IM, should explicitly include facilities 
that allow people to broadcast these types of information to their 
community of contacts.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
K.4.3 [Computers and Society]: Organizational Impacts - 
Computer-supported collaborative work.

General Terms
Design, Experimentation, Human Factors.

INTRODUCTION
Millions of people use instant messenger (IM) clients daily to 
communicate with friends, relatives, co-workers and even online 
dating contacts. With this explosion of use, researchers have 
taken to studying instant messaging and its impact. Much of the 
research regarding IM has been focused on its primary uses: 
maintaining awareness of a  contact's presence and availability, 
how people (usually dyads) converse via text chat, and how they 
exploit other features such as file sharing and receipt of 
notifications. For example,  studies of IM use in the workplace
expose  how it supports collaboration, communication and 
project activities [3, 10, 13], as well as its negative effects [15] 
such as disruption [4]. In  more social contexts,  researchers 
found a positive relationship between the amount of IM use and 
verbal, affective and social intimacy [9]. IM  also proves 
important in the life of teens, where it  helps  support  the 
maintenance of their social relationships [8].
Other computer-mediated communication tools, such as MUDs 
(Multi-User Domains or Multi-User Dungeons), IRC (Internet 
Relay Chat), and broadcast messaging tools also allow 
spontaneous real-time (or synchronous) communication with 
other users. However, there are significant differences between 
them. IM is predominately used between people who are known 
to each other outside of cyberspace, e.g., friends and associates. 
IM conversations are also private, and tend to be between pairs 
of people. They are also person centered and not group centered: 
while a contact list may collect one's `buddies', these lists are 
not shared across contacts. In contrast,  MUDs and IRC  are 
public channels, where any conversation is heard by all people 
currently in the MUD or IRC. Most  tend to  be used by 
`strangers', i.e., those who are unknown to  each other in real 
space, and usually involve more than two individuals. Indeed, 
the norm is for participants to protect their anonymity by 
displaying a pseudonym rather than their real names. Any 
personal messages that are posted are usually in relation to their 
virtual identity.  However, a few experimental MUD-like 
systems do focus on teams, where they provide  its members 
with rich awareness information of one another and more power 
in their  collaboration  tools, e.g.,  Sideshow  [2], Notification 
Collage [7], or Community Bar [12]. Broadcast messaging tools 
[11]  sit in the middle,  where real-time messages usually 
comprising notifications and announcements (not conversations) 
are sent to large groups of people who are somehow associated 
with one another, e.g., Tickertape [6].
The big `win' of IM is that it provides one's ad hoc set of 
contacts with  awareness  of  one's  online state, which in turns 
serves as an estimate of  one's availability for conversation. 
While not completely accurate  [13],  even this minimal 
information suffices to create opportunities for lightweight text-based
conversations and to reduce the equivalent of `telephone 
tag'. While many research systems go far beyond IM in the rich 
awareness  information they give to others  [e.g.,  2, 7, 12, 16], 
questions remain about privacy implications of distributing this 
information.
IM contacts are  identified by the system through e-mail 
addresses. While unique, these email addresses may be cryptic

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
GROUP'05, November 6­9, 2005, Sanibel Island, Florida, USA. 
Copyright 2005 ACM 1-59593-223-2/05/0011...$5.00.

89
to a human viewer e.g., a person may not be able to infer that 
12gorwan@yahoo.com is really Gregor McEwan. Consequently, 
the designers of most  IM clients  include a feature that  lets a 
person create and/or change their display name at any time; this 
name is shown to others  instead of the email address.  For 
example, in MSN Messenger (Figure 1) a person can raise the 
`Personal Settings...' dialog by selecting the drop-down menu 
attached to their name (i.e., `Stephanie' in the figure), and edit 
the `Display name' text field  ­ which we also call the  display 
field ­ within it. All contacts immediately see this new name.
Because we are heavy IM users, we noticed that many  of our 
contacts change their display  field to do more than simply 
identify or label themselves. Figure 1 illustrates this, where we 
see that various people have used this feature to  publicly 
broadcast what they are doing (e.g., `anitsirK ­ Marking') or an 
event in their life (e.g., `Employed'), or a personal state of mind 
(e.g., `Chasing Insanity'). Other examples we saw include using 
the  display field  as  a way to publicize personal status,  specify 
location,  post comments,  ask questions, and even  post popular 
culture references. These obviously augment IM's preset 
availability messages (i.e. away, busy, be right back) in far 
richer ways than the system was explicitly designed to support.
We believed that people's appropriation of the IM display name 
feature into a public broadcast facility is a phenomenon worth 
exploring. Why was this space being appropriated for messages 
broadcast to an entire contact list? What were users trying to 
communicate  to others  and how is this information different 
than that in a normal  IM  conversation? How often do these 
messages or alternate communications occur?  To answer these 
and other questions, we conducted a three week study, where we 
monitored changes in each person's display field within contact 
lists held by various users of MSN Messenger. We tracked how 
often  contacts changed their display name, and what these 
changes were.  We also categorized these changes into 
communication purposes.
After briefly summarizing some related work, we describe the 
methodology used to acquire display name usage data.  This is 
followed by  our results,  a discussion of the findings, 
implications of the work, and recommendations for future work.
RELATED WORK
There are a variety of articles describing how people identify 
themselves on the Internet, usually in MUDs and IRC. Yet most 
of these stress how identity is formed through pseudo-anonymity 
[1,17], i.e., where a person creates a virtual identity to project a 
different persona of who they are while protecting their real 
identity. People's choices of names and/or avatars are usually 
one part of identity creation. This work is not particularly 
applicable to IM, as people on a contact list are typically known 
to one another.
Grinter & Palen's [8] study of teen use of IM is far more 
relevant, and partially reflects our own interests. While their 
work broadly considers IM as an emerging feature of teen life, 
they  do mention that teens found the preset availability 
messages to be too impersonal. To combat feelings of exclusion 
or to avoid being rude, teens would personalize the display name 
area to include a message which explains their unavailability, 
changes in their local environment  (i.e., `Going quiet because 
Mom just arrived'), and for justifying their lack of presence on 
the system (i.e., `Out for dinner').
The use of IM names to broadcast messages is an everyday 
world phenomenon, and has been anecdotally noticed by non-scientists
. For example, one  reporter  noted in a newspaper 
article that changes to her display name are her main form of IM 
communication rather than actual chat conversations [14].
Social scientists talk more generally about computer mediated 
communications and how they can be used to build 
communities. Etzioni and Etzioni [5] argue that in order to form 
and sustain bonds, a community of connected individuals needs 
what  they  call "interactive broadcasting".  This is composed of 
two major elements:
·

the ability to broadcast messages to many people within the 
community simultaneously, and
·

the ability for those addressed by the message to provide 
feedback, not just to the message originator, but to other 
message recipients as well.
In this context, a broadcast message can be considered a request 
for interaction from some (or all) members of a group [11]. A 
variety of designers have implemented this broadcast capability 
into their systems. For example,  IRC, Notification Collage [7], 
Community Bar [12] and Tickertape [6] are  all tools that 
implement interactive broadcasting. A  message  (which may 
include multimedia information) can be posted and broadcast to 
the group, and it is possible for everyone to view the information 
without  directly contributing  to the conversation. Those who 
want to respond can do so, in full view of all users.  All  these 
systems allow for communal feedback, i.e., where everyone sees 
the response. Unlike IM, however, these systems include a 
strong notion of a common group by providing a public space 
for interaction.
In summary, there are discussions of how broadcasting 
information contributes to community building, and there are 
systems that are based on public dissemination of information 
within a group. However, excepting a few  discussions of this

Figure  1: MSN Messenger; modified display names are 
visible
90
phenomenon [8,14], there has been no real analysis of how 
people have appropriated the display name feature of IM. Given 
the importance and widespread of IM, we believe this analysis is 
critical if we are to understand how we can improve IM systems.
METHODOLOGY
This study investigates how people use the display name feature 
in IM clients  to broadcast information other than one's name. 
We do this by capturing changes in each person's display  field 
as they appear in contact lists over time and over everyday use, 
by asking people to explain what these changes meant, and by 
counting, categorizing and analyzing these changes.
3.1

Research questions
We  wanted to  identify  three main  behavioural patterns within 
our captured data:
1.

At what frequency do users change the information in their 
display  field when using an IM client such as MSN 
Messenger?
2.

What are the main communication categories that represent 
the information held by these display field changes?
3.

What is the frequency distribution of these categories?
A fourth interesting but secondary question was:
4. Are changes to the display name related to the demographics
of age or sex?
3.2

Participants
We had two classes of participants. Our primary participants 
were those who made their contact list available to us. Our 
secondary participants were those who comprised the people on 
the contact lists.
Twelve participants were recruited  as primary participants, all 
Computer Science graduate students or faculty at the University 
of Calgary. They ranged in age from 23 to 50, and were regular 
users of MSN Messenger. These participants provided access to 
their IM contact lists. They were also willing to annotate the 
collected data. While the number of contacts on each person's 
list varied somewhat, this variance was irrelevant to our study.
Our secondary participants were the  444 contacts found on the 
contact lists  of the  12  primary  participants. These contacts 
covered a broad range of demographics and social relationships, 
i.e., fellow students, workmates, friends, family members and 
other relatives. While the display names used by these 444 
people were collected as data, they were not contacted directly.
3.3

Materials and Data Capture
Each participant (whether primary or secondary) used their own 
pre-existing and unaltered MSN Messenger client on their own 
computer (running Windows) for everyday purposes.
We wrote a logging program to collect all contact list data from 
each  primary  participant.  It monitored every person's display 
field as it appeared in the contact list. The software worked by 
tapping into the programming API of MSN Messenger 
(regardless of its version) to monitor activities within it.
This  logging  program was given  only to the 12  primary 
participants. No special software was needed by the 444 
secondary participants, as their data was captured via the 
logging software on the primary participant's computer.
The 12 primary  participants installed our software on whatever 
computers  they wished. When installed, it worked in tandem 
with MSN Messenger to collect data on everyday IM usage in 
the field.
The program monitored whether the participant was logged in to 
MSN Messenger. If logged in,  it  recorded  the  initial set of 
display names and any display name  changes of the secondary 
participants on the contact list. The initial set of display names 
were needed to notice if a change occurred since the primary 
participant's last login.
As part of our analysis, we used the standard features of 
Microsoft Excel 2003  to sort and consolidate the data files.  
Relevant data was then transferred to Minitab v.14 to tally 
distributions, calculate any statistics and create visual 
representations of the data. Further analysis of the categories of 
communication used in the  display field was conducted using 
paper cut-outs and post-it notes to create an affinity diagram; 
this is detailed later.
3.4

Method
Once primary participants agreed to participate in the study, we 
gave them instructions on how to install the logging program on 
their computer. We did not have to be present for this, so people 
could install it on whichever computers they regularly used, be it 
at work or at home.  The program then ran automatically; the 
only indication of its operation was  a small red notebook icon 
appearing in the participant's system tray.  This icon allowed a 
participant to abort the collection process if they wished, but 
none chose this option.
Data was collected for  approximately three weeks, but did 
require the person to be logged onto MSN Messenger. If a 
primary participant was not logged on,  no data  about their 
contacts  was recorded.  This meant that some display  field 
changes of secondary participants could have been missed.
3.5

Analysis
At the end of three weeks,  the primary  participants were 
instructed to open the data file with Excel, and indicate the sex 
and approximate age of each  listed  contact member  in a pre-designated
column.  For each display name change, they were 
also asked to categorize the type of information the contact was 
trying to broadcast to others. We did not predefine any 
categories. Participants created their own category labels and 
categorized names into them however they wished.  We chose 
this approach because we felt that participants would have a far 
better understanding of  the true meaning of a person's display 
field changes than someone unfamiliar with the contact; we also 
felt that as recipients of this information, their interpretation was 
important. We also believed that they would generate a greater ­ 
and therefore richer ­ breadth of categories.
Once the categorizations were completed, the data files were 
transferred to the  primary  investigator.  The investigator 
consolidated all of the data files into one master file,  and 
removed any duplicate entries.  These duplicate entries occurred 
for two reasons.
·

More than one person had a particular contact on their list.
·

Each time a participant logged in, their entire contact list 
was recorded in the data file.  If a contact had not changed 
their name while the participant was offline, a duplicate 
entry was created.
91
When duplicate entries occurred, all but the earliest occurrence 
of the display name change was removed.
A category list was created for each primary participant based 
on his or her individual categorizations of display name changes. 
Because these category names could differ between participants, 
we needed to re-categorize these names into a master category 
list. To do this, all categories were printed on separate slips of 
paper for easy sorting.  We then created an affinity diagram to 
resort these categories, where  entries from all the lists were 
sorted into groups based on similarity. These groups then 
formed a master category (see Figure 2). A master category title 
was then chosen that  best represented the theme for the 
grouping. After this master list was established, the entries in the 
consolidated file were then re-categorized based on these new 
divisions; this would allow us to create a distribution profile.
We should mention that  many entries into the display field 
contained more than one  textual  element, each of which could 
be categorized differently.  When this happened, we treated the 
display field as holding  multiple entries. An example of this is 
shown  here, where 
the contact's display 
field contains two elements; `Johnboy' could be categorized as a 
Name Variation,  while `yonge&eglington' (a street junction in 
Toronto) is categorized as an indicator of Location. In this case, 
this display field entry  would  be split into two text fragments, 
where each fragment would be counted in the category that best 
fit.  As we will see, these types of dual entry usually occurred 
because people tend to keep their names  (or an identifying
variation thereof) visible to others in order to identify 
themselves. Occasionally a display  field would contain two 
elements where neither were identifiers.  For example, the text 
shown here  is categorized 
as two elements: `packing' 
is an Activity, and `sad to be leaving' is a Mood. Only rarely did 
display field entries contain more than two elements.
RESULTS
Our first research question was:
At what frequency do users change the information in their 
display  field when using an IM client such as MSN 
Messenger?
Before answering this question, recall that  the  recording  of 
display field changes of a secondary participant on a contact list 
only happened when  the primary participant was  logged on to 
MSN Messenger. If the primary participant was logged out, no 
display field  changes  to their contacts  were recorded. While a 
single change would be noted by comparing the last recorded 
version of the contact's display field to the one recorded when 
the primary participant logs on, multiple changes during the 
logout period would be lost. This means we cannot calculate the 
exact display name change distribution across all contacts. Still, 
our numbers should be a good estimate of what happens. At the 
very least  they represent a lower bound that  somewhat 
underestimates how often display fields changes occur. The data 
certainly suffices to indicate the range of  activities and 
individual differences across 444 people. 
Figure 3 illustrates the distribution of contacts according to how 
often they changed the contents of the display field. Our results 
show that 58% of our 444 contacts (258 people) never changed 
the  contents of the display field during the three week period. 
For the remaining 42% of contacts (186 people), we counted a 
total of 1968 display name changes, or an average of 11 display 
name changes per person over the three week period, or up to 4 
times a week.

Never
58.1%
Rarely
12.2%
Weekly
5.6%
Several times a day
4.5%
Daily
3.4%
Several times
a week
16.2%

Figure  3: Distribution of contacts according to how often 
they change the display field contents

Figure 2: Example affinity diagram  used to group participant 
categorizations into master categories.
92
However, this average is misleading, for we also found that 
people change their display names at different frequencies. We 
created six rate change categories. Based on a contact's data, we 
placed each contact into the category  that best  estimated  that 
contact's change rate.  Figure  3 displays this  distribution of 
contacts among the six rate change categories. We see  that the 
42% of contacts  who change their display name do so at 
different rates. About 8% (4.5% + 3.4%) of contacts change 
their names from once to several times a day. About 22% of 
them change their names less often, from once to several times a 
week (16.2% + 5.6%). The final 12% change it rarely, i.e., once 
or twice over the three week period.  
The  person who had  the highest display field change rate  is 
worth  added discussion, as it suggests what happens with 
contacts who used this feature heavily. This person changed her 
display field early in the morning, and notified contacts  when 
she arrived at school.  Around 4  pm the changes started again, 
continuing until approximately 11  pm when  she went to bed. 
Her  changes would incorporate details on what was occupying 
her time. Changes would state particulars: when  she  was 
studying, babysitting, or watching TV, and  her  emotional 
reactions to these events. If she found something entertaining or 
interesting on TV, she would post quotes. If she was bored, she 
would put out a request for someone/anyone to call. In essence, 
this person used  her display field as a  web  log, where  she 
recorded and disseminated information to her community. Even 
though we had no further knowledge of this person, a sense of 
who  she was and what  her life was  garnered through all the 
changes that she made to her display name.
4.2

Communication categories
Our second research question was:
What are the main communication categories  that represent 
the information held by these display field changes?
After  analyzing the categories created by our primary 
participants through the  affinity  diagramming process,  we 
identified seventeen master categories. These are listed below in 
alphabetic order. A description of each category is given along 
with illustrative examples taken from our data. Many examples 
contain more than one textual element, usually an identifier, as 
we present them as they appeared in the display field. To protect 
confidentiality, name information has been changed.
Activities include things or activities that a person has done in 
the past, is currently involved in, or is about to participate in the 
future. It also includes countdowns to an upcoming event. 
Examples include: 
§

Amy - House hunting!
§

Joe was drunk on a Tuesday...shameful.
§

Braced: 60% done my portfolio!
Adverts include  advertisements or  promotions for items or 
events, and things that people have for sale.  
§

Easton Synergy Grip 100 Flex Iginla Blade Left (Brand 
spanking new): $225
§

headachey  -- Tim Stuart Tribute and Fundraiser November 
6th @ 8PM -- ask for details
Comments  are personal comments, expressions of an 
individual's opinion and  general  statements on how they view 
things in the world around them.  
§

Jan[et] - Airlines are Evil
§

Bee - undocumented code should be illegal
§

Nancy: you don't need English to live in Vancouver
Default contains only the default unaltered entries to the display 
field. After installation, the IM client displays a person's e-mail 
address in the field.  These may or may not actually contain a 
person's name as part of the email address. 
§

johnsmith@hotmail.com
§

Jyn2l@hotmail.com
Directions  contain entries where a reader is being directed to a 
web site or link. Examples are: 
§

Bee-http://java.sun.com/features/1999/05/duke_gallery.html
§

jessie {http://littlemisskool.blogspot.com}
§

CHECK THIS====&gt; http://www.blitzkreigentt.com/.... 
Constructed &lt;====
Fun  contains entries that contain puns, inside jokes, humorous 
statements, and items placed for the amusement of others. 
§

Melanie. me: "come see, its a lunar eclipse";  kate: "where?"
§

what do you call a fish with no eyes: f sh
§

Huffy - Home is where you hang your @
§

Joe Like
a Vermin, trapped for the very first time

Handles contains those display name entries that hold a 
person's handle. A handle is like a well known nickname: it is a 
consistent title or name that people give themselves to represent 
their identity on the internet. As we will see later, IM handles 
are not used for the pseudo-anonymity purposes as found in IRC 
public forums.  
§

hunnybear
§

Iceman
§

spidermax
Location contains information about a person's current location 
or future destination. It can also contain travel information. 
Many times this location information is permanently attached to 
the display name when localized at a particular computer, as in 
"home" or "work". This label can indicate to others the type of 
communications that are appropriate. 
§

Mat Singh...going home in 10 days!
§

In the dominican republic
§

Dan James [Office]
§

mike -&gt; lab meeting
Messages contain information of significance directed at an 
individual on a person's contact list or to the group as a whole.  
§

darren~thanks nate for the halo hookup

§

SirMe - Happy Birthday, Angie!
§

Melanie. Nick, ill be on the 3 30 or whatever bus at the 
college.  &lt;&lt;school&gt;&gt;
Mood contains entries that give indications of a person's mood, 
feelings, health or state of being.  
§

i give up
§

Adam feels rejected
§

britney - disoriented haze
§

Joe - as if shot in the head, yet still charging blindly forward.
§

Bee - double espresso
whee!!!
§

Maggs - Not Feeling Well.
Name contains entries of a person's given name. This category 
contains no nicknames, handles or variations on the name.  
§

Rebecca
§

Fred Jones
93
Notices contains entries that give notice of a particular event, 
share news or display announcements. 
§

DBosch [ We're home owners! ]
§

Tracey... down 24.2 lbs
§

Jennifer - party is cancelled
§

NaKuL - new msn login
§

Gretchen -- Holy Cole's coming to vancouver!!
Presence  contains items which provide more detailed 
information about a person's online presence or availability 
beyond the standard status indicators. 
§

Bee - really am busy, only msg me in emergency
§

Melanie. &gt;&gt; off for family time&lt;&lt;
§

mike - reading at my desk/disregard (Away) status
§

Flickerin: be Back at 630ish
Questions contain rhetorical questions and questions that are 
posed to stimulate response. This category also contains 
questions that are requests for assistance, similar to those that 
appear in company broadcast messaging systems when a person 
is searching for an expert in a given area [6].  
§

Luke -- Anyone took CS322? I need some help with cilog!
§

Joe - who keeps messing with my chair??
§

Shri- Needin' a Physics Toolkit w/Dynamics  +  Collisions  + 
Fields, any ideas?
§

Melanie.  Anyone have a working printer?
Quotes contains quotations taken from movies, tv, books, plays 
or lyrics from music. It also contains references to pop culture. 
§

Dusit - If you can dodge a wrench, you can dodge anything!
§

b33qZ -- king jeremy the wicked... oh, rules his world...
§

Andrea - so long and thanks for all the fish
Unknown contains all the entries in which the meaning of the 
text is too cryptic that it could not be categorized by either the 
primary participant or the investigator. It is assumed that once 
deciphered that each of these entries could be placed in one of 
the other sixteen categories. 
§

b33qZ [nts:perri]
§

Andy ~ Ah é§'
§

Black_Venom (In 432)Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â
§

Â»~-jd-~Â«--&gt;
SkRoNk
&lt;-- yeh social ppl
Variations contain entries where the identifier is a variation on 
the person's name. This can include an abbreviated version of 
the full name, a nickname in which the given name is still 
identifiable, or a variation in the way the letters of the name are 
printed or ordered. 
§

DiAnNe
§

kev
§

Maggs
§

timbob
§

Einahpets

4.3

Category Distribution Frequency
Our third research question was:
What is the frequency distribution of these categories?
First, the  2226  logged  display fields were analyzed to reveal a 
total of  3603  elements (recall that some display fields could 
have more than one information element in it).  Second, each 
element was then located in  a single communications category 
that best represented its meaning.
Figure 4 shows these category counts in two sections. The top 
part plots the  Name, Variations and Handle categories. We 
separated these `Identification' categories from the other 
categories because the information they contain satisfy the 
original purpose of the  display field i.e., to hold identifying 
information. The  frequency distribution of the  remaining 14 
categories are then listed.  
The  bar representing the  counts of the  number of  elements 
within  each of  these categories are further distinguished  into 
three groups.  The lightest section of  each bar represents the 
group of category elements that were the only element contained 
by the  display field.  The  medium coloured section shows  the 
number of category elements whose text coexisted with another 
element found in  one of the three `Identification' categories in 
the display field. The darkest section of the bar groups category 
elements whose text coexisted in the display field with another 
element found in  any category other than the three 
`Identification' categories. 
The figure shows that approximately 49%, or 1766/3603 of the 
categorized  elements, were in one of  the three  `Identification' 
categories, i.e.,  Name (32.4%),  Variations (10%) or  Handle 
(6.4%).  This makes sense, for  meaningful  self-identification  is 
the expected use of the IM display name feature.  The darkly 
colored regions of their bars  also reveal that  identification 
elements in total coexist with other pieces of information in the 
display field  over  67%  (1186/1766)  of the time.  For example, 
the Name was included with other elements 825/1168 (71%) of 
the time. Similarly,  Variations  and  Handles  was included

Figure 4: Bar chart displaying category distribution
94
205/359 (43%) and 156/239 (65%) in conjunction with other 
elements.  Note that there are no medium coloured regions in 
these bars. This is because  elements within the  Name, 
Variations and  Handle categories  never co-existed with each 
other.  They  only  occurred  in conjunction with  elements in the 
other 14 category types.  
The other 14 categories of communication identify information 
unrelated to  identification.  Collectively, these categories 
comprise the other 51% of the total number of elements (1837 of 
3603 total). Within these 1837  elements, we see that the most 
frequent categories of communication used are Mood at 19.4% 
(357/1837),  Comments at 17.8% (327/1837)  Activities at 
16.6% (305/1837), Location at 12.5% (230/1837), Messages at 
8.3% (152/1837), followed by Quotes, Notices  and Fun. The 
other categories occur less often, but still at a significant level. 
The  modest size of the lightly coloured section of all these 
categories suggest that this information often appeared in 
tandem with other categories. Most of time, this was one of the 
Name,  Variations, or  Handle elements, as represented by the 
medium-coloured section in each bar. Still, the presence of the 
darkly coloured bar sections showed  that two  non-identifier 
category elements may coexist in a display field.
4.4

Demographics of People Who Change 
Their Display Names
Our final research question was:
Are changes to the display name related to the demographics 
of age or sex?
The 444 contacts comprised somewhat more males than 
females. The  primary participants reported  232 males, 189 
females, and 1 male/female (the account was known to be used 
by a couple). The sex of the remaining 22 contacts was not 
reported.  
The dominant age range of the 444 contacts was between 21-30 
years old. Table 1 summarizes the age demographics of the 444 
contacts, as reported by our 12 primary participants.  Since the 
exact age of each contact was sometimes uncertain, we used age 
group categories to capture their estimated ages. 
We then analyzed whether age or sex of a person was related to 
the number of changes that person made.  First, we removed 
records for those contacts whose sex was not reported. We then 
performed  a chi-square analysis on the remaining 421 contacts 
to determine whether there was a relationship between sex and 
the rate that a person changed their  display  field.  Sex and 
display name change rate were found to be independent,

2 (5,
N = 421) = 7.54,  p = 0.183. That is, no relationship exists 
between the sex of a person and how often a person changes the 
display name. 
We performed a similar chi-square analysis for age and display 
name change rates, where unreported people were excluded. 
Age groups were collapsed into three age ranges: &lt;20,   21 to 
30,   and 31+.  This was done for analytic reasons, since several 
cells in the chi-square analysis would have contained counts of 
less than one with the original divisions.  Age range and name 
change rates were found to be not independent,

2 (10, N = 413)
= 20.507,  p = 0.025. That is, a relationship exists between the 
age of a person and their likelihood of changing their display 
name. This result will be examined further in the discussion.
DISCUSSION
The most important thing revealed by our study is that a good 
number of people persistently  used the display  name feature to 
publicly broadcast information about themselves to their friends, 
and that this happened outside of individual chat sessions. They 
did this in spite of the fact  that  IM  display fields  are not 
explicitly  designed to be a public broadcast system. This 
suggests that systems should be designed to better support this 
kind of broadcast activity. Details are discussed below.
5.1

Interpreting the results
People change the information in their display  field.  From 
this study we have learned that the changing of the information 
in  an IM  display  field is not an oddity or something done 
occasionally by certain individuals.  Rather, it is a popular 
behaviour: 42% of users in our study changed their display 
name, and 25%  did so several times a week or more.    This 
behaviour happens in spite of the fact that the Instant Messenger 
client  we studied does not make changing the display name 
immediately accessible (e.g., through direct manipulation): 
people had to raise menus, dialog boxes, and form fill the text.
People use the display field for identification, to give 
information about self, and to broadcast messages.  People 
used the limited text that could be displayed in the display field 
in rich ways. Seventeen  different  categories  were needed to 
describe the various communications placed in the display field.
Stepping back, three themes  encompass these categories. The 
first theme  is Identification: "who am I"? The second theme is 
Information About Self: "this is what is going on with me".  The 
third theme is Broadcast Messages: "I am directing information 
to the community". These are described separately in the 
following three sections.
Identification is fundamental.  Identifying oneself  to personal 
contacts by typing one's own name in the display field is the 
original purpose of this  feature; the name replaces the default 
email address as a way to uniquely identify a person. This 
proved necessary because e-mail addresses are a poor substitute 
for a name; some email services enforce cryptic email addresses, 
and others are so oversubscribed that all but the rarest names are 
already taken.
Table 1: Age distribution of contact group
Age Group
Count
Percent
&lt;15
7
1.69
16-20
24
5.81
21-25
179
43.34
26-30
126
30.51
31-35
36
8.72
36-40
18
4.36
40+
23
5.57
N =    413, Unreported =   31
95
While people identified themselves in several ways,  inserting 
one's real Name or a recognizable Variation of it (e.g., initials 
or nicknames) proved  the  two  most common communication 
categories. Handles was also popular (a constant representative 
name  that superficially resembles nicknames  in  IRC or 
discussion groups on the Internet [1, 17]). Regardless of the 
differences between these categories, in all cases the names, 
variations or handles presented are not used to maintain pseudo-anonymity
or complete anonymity as in IRC or MUDs. Rather, 
the identifier is something that the contact group  uses to 
recognize a known individual.
Another indicator of the importance of the Identification 
categories is that many users keep their name visible even when 
they add extra information to the display field (the black bars in 
the three identification categories, and the grey bars in the other 
14 categories in Figure 4). People do this in spite of the limited 
display space:  in a normally sized IM window  about 30-50 
display field characters are viewable. As well, the usual order of 
this information is a name followed by the extra information. A 
typical example is illustrated in Figure 5. This inclusion of 
identity is likely done as a courtesy behaviour so that others can 
distinguish between contacts without resorting to  deciphering 
the e-mail address.
Extra information is usually about self.   Of the remaining 14 
categories, the majority of them  provide information about 
`self'.  Elements in these `about self' categories dominate the 
frequency count (~85% of the non-name elements), with the top 
four categories providing information about Mood, Comments, 
Activities,  and Location.  These top categories all present 
information about the person at a moment in time: they annotate 
how they are feeling, what they are doing, or where they are. 
Similarly, the lesser used Presence category indicates if they are 
available, thus augmenting the preset status indicators, while 
Quotes and  Fun  are indirect indicators of state of mind and 
personality traits. Obviously, these people want to disclose an 
additional level of information  revealing  personal state and 
action to  their community of friends, close contacts and 
collaborators. The regular association of this kind of information 
with one's name means that this information is truly about self; 
this is in sharp contrast to the personas found in chat  systems, 
where people construct an artificial pseudonym identity through 
avatars or nicknames [1, 17].
People want to be able to broadcast information without 
involving conversation. Most of the remaining categories (about 
14% of the non-name  elements)  contain communicative 
messages intended for the group. In particular,  Messages, 
Notices, Questions  and Directions are categories  that either 
provide information thought to be of interest to the group or are 
posted to stimulate a response. Most of these are undirected e.g., 
`Does anyone know...'.  Occasionally, a message  may be 
specifically directed to an individual, yet this is done in a forum 
public to the community of contacts. Clearly, people are 
adapting the  IM  display  field into a form of  public  broadcast
communication facility; they are thus  fulfilling one element of 
the broadcasting system described by Etzioni and Etzioni [5].
Since each user's contact list contains a different set of names, a 
responder (who may change their display  name to respond to 
another's broadcast message) is likely not sending that response 
to the same community of people. This hampering of responses 
suggests that display  names are less effective for creating the 
running dialogs common to  IRC,  MUDs and other public 
broadcast systems [6, 11, 17].
Asynchronous messaging. In MSN Messenger, the direct chat 
facility is  session based. That is, direct chat cannot be used by 
one person to leave information for a currently `Offline' 
participant to read later. In contrast, the display  name persists 
across sessions, meaning that asynchronous communication to 
offline participants is  possible. For example,  consider the 
message `SirMe - Happy Birthday, Angie!' that was found in the 
Messages category. By including this in his display name, 
SirMe is leaving an asynchronous message that Angie  (and 
others) can see when they come on line.
Younger users may change their display names more 
frequently than older users; sex does not make a difference. 
The demographics  of our study suggest some  demographic 
trends, which are described below.    However, we caution that, 
due to the way we collected data, the demographic findings and 
how they relate to display  name changes are  at best  tentative. 
First, the age ranges of our secondary contacts (as being 14 ­ 65 
years old) were likely heavily influenced by the fact that these 
contacts were culled from the lists of only 12 primary 
participants (from 22 ­ 50 years old), most of whom were within 
the 21-30 age group, weighing the data with a similar age range. 
Second, our data is incomplete as display  field change data for 
secondary contacts  was not collected when their  associated 
primary contact was off line.  Third, ages of secondary 
participants were estimated, which affects the analysis we could 
do.  In spite of this tentative flavour, we include our results as 
they suggest trends and future areas of study.
We saw  a fairly balanced number of males and females in our 
sample: 55% were male, 45% were female.  The chi-square 
analysis for sex and display field change rates indicated that the 
two variables are independent, i.e., the sex of the participant 
does not suggest how often that person would change their 
display  name.  However, the  chi-square  analysis for participant 
age and display field changes suggests that they are related
1
. We
subsequently examined the chi-square table data to compare the 
observed count with the expected count for each cell of age 
group crossed with rate.  Discrepancies between the observed 
and expected counts indicate a pattern where younger users are 
more apt to  frequently  change their display name  when 
compared to older users. This trend may reflect a "computer 
generation" gap where  younger users  would be more apt to 
change their display name. It could also reflect a culture gap, 
where younger users  are using it for social reasons  [8], while 
older users are using it for workplace purposes [13].

1

While the chi-square test determined that the two variables are not
independent, it does not provide details on how the two variables are 
related. If true values of age and average change rates were available 
instead of our estimated categories (a subject of a future study),  other 
statistical analyses could be used to reveal this detail.
Figure 5: A typical display field showing how people retain 
identity (Name), followed by other information (Activity)
96
5.2

Implications for practitioners
People persistently use the display field not only to identify 
themselves to their community of contacts, but to reveal 
personal information about self and to broadcast messages. They 
do this in spite of the fact that the display field facility was 
designed for other purposes; the IM community  co-opted  this 
feature to fill their real desires and needs. 
The first major implication is that IM and similar facilities need 
first-class interface features that let people broadcast identifying 
information, information about self,  and public messages. 
Because some people change this information fairly often, this 
information should be easy to create and alter, e.g., through 
direct manipulation. 
Some of these capabilities are only now being supplied by a few 
major IM vendors.  For example, the new version of MSN 
Messenger (v. 7.0),  released  shortly  after  our study  was 
performed), includes a dedicated space for adding and editing a 
personal message (Figure 6, top). A person can directly alter this 
text by clicking within it: no menus or dialog boxes have to be 
navigated or raised. Other people see this personal information 
as visually distinguished text, e.g., the italicized text within the 
contact list (Figure 6, bottom).  The personal information 
message is also proprietary to the machine, similar to the display 
picture.  Thus people can  set unique location labels to  various 
computers if desired, i.e. home or work.  
The Community Bar  (CB)  [12]  is a multimedia  groupware 
system being developed by collaborators in our laboratory. 
Elements of its design  are partially influenced by our study 
results. People within an ad hoc group inhabit places, and all see 
the equivalent of a contact list within a place.  For example, 
Figure 7 shows a place called `IM Paper' and three participants 
within it.  To support `Identification', each participant is 
represented by a `Presence item', which shows running video (or 
photo) of them, their name. To support `Information about self', 
the Presence item also includes optional  personal  information 
(which may wrap across multiple lines) that persists across login 
sessions. A person can quickly modify this personal information 
by a popup raised whenever he or she moves their mouse over
their item (Figure 7, right side).  To support `Broadcast 
Messages',  it also lets people broadcast and respond to public 
messages to all people in the group. This public broadcast is not 
available in MSN Messenger 7, For example, Figure 7 (bottom) 
illustrates a public text chat dialog that lets anyone in the group 
post messages;  all see  its contents and all can post  responses. 
Not shown is a sticky note facility, where a person can post a 
persistent message to all.  Finally, certain categories of 
information are supported. For example, `Directions' are 
satisfied by letting people post a `web item' (not illustrated): a 
thumbnail of a web page of interest that others can navigate to 
via a single button press.  
Another implication of our study is that people  use many 
different categories of information ­ especially when describing 
self  ­ which in turn suggests that people are trying to provide 
others with a rich picture of themselves. Yet most systems, even 
the current ones shown above,  only let people set one attribute 
of themselves in their personal message space (although they 
may combine these in a text fragment). Perhaps future systems 
will let people construct an `avatar'  of sorts  with multiple 
attributes that distinguish these categories, so that (say) mood, 
location and activity are treated independently rather than 
compete for a small space. 
While these (and likely other) systems suggest point design 
solutions to our implications, what is important is that our study 
has placed this work on a solid intellectual footing. It provides 
details of what people have done, and has identified the 
categories of information that people supply. For example, we 
suspect that MSN Messenger's inclusion of a personal 
information field arose because its designers noticed that people 
were  moulding the technology to suit their needs, and  they 
wanted  to "fix the interface" to better fulfill  these needs. In 
contrast, our study helps designers understand why

Figure 6: MSN Messenger v7.0 separates editing and display 
of names and personal messages.


Figure  7: Snapshot of Community Bar displaying personal 
message space within presence item
97
appropriation occurred in the first place.  Looking at the  17 
categories of communication that are used in messages found in 
the display name space, we saw that most are personal, or about 
the self. In taking over this space, users are not  `hacking' to 
make  IM do  totally  different things.  Rather, they are adding 
richness to their identity beyond  their simple name label. They 
are expressing identity, and they own this expression by using a 
text field that only they can alter.  
We also saw that there is some use of the display field for public 
broadcasting of messages. This suggests that there is a problem 
with the way we compartmentalize systems: IM systems with no 
real notion of groups or public broadcast, versus IRC and similar 
systems where public broadcasts dominate. The real solution 
likely amalgamates both: a system that somehow supports both 
public and private discussions between ad hoc (and perhaps non-overlapping
) groups. To our knowledge, only very few systems 
(such as the Community Bar above [12]) are trying to tackle this 
fusion of genres.
CONCLUSION
Most studies of communication using instant messenger clients 
have been focused on the activities within the main chat 
window.  In contrast, this study  examined how  contacts 
appropriate IM technology to publicly broadcast information by 
adding extra text to their display name. We exposed patterns of 
behaviour, where we saw that  almost half of the contacts  we 
monitored change their display names with varying frequencies. 
We established a set of seventeen communication categories for 
the different types of personal messages  added to the display 
field.  We saw that people did want to identify themselves (the 
Name,  Variations and Handles  category), and that these were 
true identities that contacts would recognize versus anonymous 
pseudonyms not known by others within the social group. We 
also saw that the most popular communications were those that 
added personal information about self: a person's psycho-physiological
status,  one's current activities, details  of their 
location,  and expressions of personal comments and opinions. 
We also saw that people occasionally used it to broadcast 
messages to the group, a facility not otherwise available in IM.  
These findings  suggest that personal information and public 
broadcast of messages, currently supported through this creative 
appropriation by users,  should be provided as a first class 
interface feature in IM design.
This is just the first of a set of studies that could be done. Much 
has been discovered, although these results should be verified 
and refined further. For example, modest refinements of our 
study protocol would allow us to more precisely capture  the 
frequency of changes  within the display field  and their 
distribution within the different communication categories. 
However, we suspect that the  actual  categories of 
communication  will not change dramatically.  We would also 
like to consider the author's intentions of a display name change 
along with the recipient's opinion. More importantly, we intend 
to  study behaviour and communication patterns within systems 
that provide explicit support for personal information supply 
(such as MSN v7.0) and public broadcast (such as the 
Community Bar).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Many  thanks to all those who participated in this project and 
took precious time to make communication category evaluations
for their many contacts' display name changes; their input was 
invaluable.  Special thanks to  Gregor McEwan and  Michael 
Boyle for  their advice both on intellectual content and on our 
recording software. This work was funded in part by the NSERC 
Nectar Research Networks program.

REFERENCES
[1]

Bechar-Israeli, H. (1995). From &quot;Bonehead&quot; to 
&quot;cLoNehEAd&quot;: Nicknames, play and identity on internet 
relay chat.  J. Computer-Mediated Communication, 1 (2).
[2]

Cadiz J. J., Venolia G. D., Jancke G. & Gupta A. Designing 
and Deploying an Information Awareness Interface.  Proc 
ACM CSCW (2002). 314-323.
[3]

Cameron, A. F.  & Webster, J. (2005). Unintended 
consequences of emerging communication technologies: 
Instant Messaging in the workplace. Computers in Human 
Behaviour, 21, 85-103.
[4]

Cutrell E. B., Czerwinski M. & Horvitz E. Effects of 
instant messaging interruptions on computing tasks. In 
Proc ACM CHI Extended Abstracts (2002). 99-100.
[5]

Etzioni, A. & Etzioni, O. (1999). Face-to-face and 
computer-mediated communities, a comparative analysis. 
The Information Society, 15, 241-248.
[6]

Fitzpatrick, G., Parsowith, S., Segall, B., & Kaplan, S. 
(1998). Tickertape: Awareness in a single line. Proc ACM 
CHI (1998).  281-282.
[7]

Greenberg, S. & Rounding, M. (2001). The Notification 
Collage: Posting Information to Public and Personal 
Displays. Proc ACM CHI (2001). 514-521.
[8]

Grinter, R. E. & Palen, L. (2002). Instant messaging in teen 
life. Proc ACM CSCW (2002). 21-30.
[9]

Hu, Y., Wood, J. F., Smith, V., & Westbrook, N. (2004). 
Friendships through IM: Examining the relationship 
between instant messaging and intimacy.  J Computer-Mediated
Communication, 10 (1).
[10]

Isaacs E., Walendowski A., Whittaker S., Schiano D. J. & 
Kamm C. (2002) The character, functions, and styles of 
instant messaging in the workplace,  Proc ACM  CSCW 
(2002). 11-20.
[11]

Jania, F. (2003). Broadcast Messaging: Messaging to the 
masses. Queue, 1 (8), 38-43.
[12]

McEwan, G. and Greenberg, S.  Supporting Social Worlds 
with the Community Bar.  To appear in  Proceedings of  
ACM Group 2005, Sanibel Island, Florida, Nov 6-9.
[13]

Nardi, B. A., Whittaker, S., & Bradner, E. Interaction and 
outeraction: instant messaging in action. In  Proc  ACM 
CSCW (2000), 79-88.
[14]

Piepmeyer, A. I've been replaced by a screen name.  The 
Daily Utah Chronicle,
October 31, 2003.
www.dailyutahchronicle.com/news/2003/10/31/Opinion/ 
Ive-Been.Replaced.By.A.Screen.Name-545565.shtml
[15]

Rennecker J. & Godwin L. Theorizing the Unintended 
Consequences of Instant Messaging for Worker 
Productivity,  Sprouts: Working Papers on Information 
Environments, Systems and Organizations, 3 (Summer).  
Retrieved Dec 3, 2004 //weatherhead.cwru.edu/sprouts/ 
2003/030307.pdf
[16]

Tang, J. C. & Begole, J. (2003). Beyond instant messaging. 
Queue, 1 (8), 28-37.
[17]

Turkle, S. (1997). Life on the Screen: Identity in the Age of 
the Internet. New York: Simon & Schuster Inc.

98
