Interference Evaluation of Bluetooth and IEEE 802.11b Systems
Abstract
Abstract. The emergence of several radio technologies, such as Bluetooth and IEEE 802.11, operating in the 2.4 GHz unlicensed ISM
frequency band, may lead to signal interference and result in significant performance degradation when devices are colocated in the same
environment. The main goal of this paper is to evaluate the effect of mutual interference on the performance of Bluetooth and IEEE 802.11b
systems. We develop a simulation framework for modeling interference based on detailed MAC and PHY models. First, we use a simple
simulation scenario to highlight the effects of parameters, such as transmission power, offered load, and traffic type. We then turn to more
complex scenarios involving multiple Bluetooth piconets and WLAN devices.

Introduction
The proliferation of mobile computing devices including laptops
, personal digital assistants (PDAs), and wearable computers
has created a demand for wireless personal area networks
(WPANs). WPANs allow closely located devices to
share information and resources.
A key challenge in the
design of WPANs is adapting to a hostile radio environment
that includes noise, time-varying channels, and abundant
electromagnetic interference. Today, most radio technologies
considered by WPANs (Bluetooth Special Interest
Group [2], and IEEE 802.15) employ the 2.4 GHz ISM frequency
band, which is also used by Local Area Network
(WLAN) devices implementing the IEEE 802.11b standard
specifications [9]. It is anticipated that some interference will
result from all these technologies operating in the same environment
. WLAN devices operating in proximity to WPAN
devices may significantly impact the performance of WPAN
and vice versa.
The main goal of this paper is to present our findings on the
performance of these systems when operating in close proximity
to each other. Our results are based on detailed models
for the MAC, PHY, and wireless channel. Recently, a number
of research activities has led to the development of tools for
wireless network simulation [1,16]. While some of these tools
include a PHY layer implementation, it is often abstracted to
a discrete channel model that does not implement interference
per se. Therefore, in order to model interference and capture
the time and frequency collisions, we chose to implement an
integrated MAC-PHY module.
Efforts to study interference in the 2.4 GHz band are relatively
recent. For example, interference caused by microwave
ovens operating in the vicinity of a WLAN network has been
investigated [17] and requirements on the signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) are presented by Kamerman and Erkocevic [11].

Corresponding author.
E-mail: nada.golmie@nist.gov
In addition, there has been several attempts at quantifying
the impact of interference on both the WLAN and Bluetooth
performance. Published results can be classified into at least
three categories depending on whether they rely on analysis,
simulation, or experimental measurements.
Analytical results based on probability of packet collision
were obtained by Shellhammer [13], Ennis [4], and
Zyren [18] for the WLAN packet error and by Golmie [6]
for the Bluetooth packet error. In all these cases, the probability
of packet error is computed based on the probability of
packet collision in time and frequency. Although these analytical
results can often give a first order approximation on the
impact of interference and the resulting performance degradation
, they often make assumptions concerning the traffic
distributions and the operation of the media access protocol,
which can make them less realistic. More importantly, in order
for the analysis to be tractable, mutual interference that
can change the traffic distribution for each system is often ig-nored
.
On the other hand, experimental results, such as the ones
obtained by Kamerman [10], Howitt et al. [8], and Fumolari
[5] for a two-node WLAN system and a two-node Bluetooth
piconet, can be considered more accurate at the cost
of being too specific to the implementation tested. Thus, a
third alternative consists of using modeling and simulation to
evaluate the impact of interference. This third approach can
provide a more flexible framework. Zurbes et al. [19] present
simulation results for a number of Bluetooth devices located
in a single large room. They show that for 100 concurrent
web sessions, performance is degraded by only 5%. Golmie
et al. [7] use a detailed MAC and PHY simulation framework
to evaluate the impact of interference for a pair of WLAN
devices and a pair of Bluetooth devices. Similar results have
been obtained by Lansford et al. [12] for the case of colocated
WLAN and Bluetooth devices on the same laptop. Their simulation
models are based on a link budget analysis and a theoretical
calculation of the BER (Q function calculation). The
work in this paper is an extension of [7].
202
GOLMIE ET AL.
Figure 1. Master TX/RX hopping sequence.
This paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we give
some general insights on the Bluetooth and IEEE 802.11 protocol
operation. In section 3, we describe in great detail our
modeling approach for the MAC, PHY and wireless channel.
In section 4, we evaluate the impact of interference on both
Bluetooth and WLAN performance and present simulation results
. Concluding remarks are offered in section 5.
Protocol overview
In this section, we give a brief overview of the Bluetooth technology
[2] and discuss the main functionality of its protocol
specifications. Bluetooth is a short range (0­10 m) wireless
link technology aimed at replacing non-interoperable proprietary
cables that connect phones, laptops, PDAs and other
portable devices together. Bluetooth operates in the ISM frequency
band starting at 2.402 GHz and ending at 2.483 GHz
in the USA and Europe. 79 RF channels of 1 MHz width are
defined. The air interface is based on an antenna power of
1 mW with an antenna gain of 0 dB. The signal is modulated
using binary Gaussian Frequency Shift Keying (GFSK). The
raw data rate is defined at 1 Mbit/s. A Time Division Multiplexing
(TDM) technique divides the channel into 625 µs
slots. Transmission occurs in packets that occupy an odd
number of slots (up to 5). Each packet is transmitted on a
different hop frequency with a maximum frequency hopping
rate of 1600 hops/s.
Two or more units communicating on the same channel
form a piconet, where one unit operates as a master and the
others (a maximum of seven active at the same time) act as
slaves. A channel is defined as a unique pseudo-random frequency
hopping sequence derived from the master device's
48-bit address and its Bluetooth clock value. Slaves in the
piconet synchronize their timing and frequency hopping to
the master upon connection establishment. In the connection
mode, the master controls the access to the channel using a
polling scheme where master and slave transmissions alternate
. A slave packet always follows a master packet transmission
as illustrated in figure 1, which depicts the master's
view of the slotted TX/RX channel.
There are two types of link connections that can be
established between a master and a slave: the Synchronous
Connection-Oriented (SCO), and the Asynchronous
Connection-Less (ACL) link. The SCO link is a symmetric
point-to-point connection between a master and a slave
where the master sends an SCO packet in one TX slot at regular
time intervals, defined by T
SCO
time slots. The slave responds
with an SCO packet in the next TX opportunity. T
SCO
is set to either 2, 4 or 6 time slots for HV1, HV2, or HV3
packet formats, respectively. All three formats of SCO packets
are defined to carry 64 Kbit/s of voice traffic and are never
retransmitted in case of packet loss or error.
The ACL link is an asymmetric point-to-point connection
between a master and active slaves in the piconet. An Automatic
Repeat Request (ARQ) procedure is applied to ACL
packets where packets are retransmitted in case of loss until
a positive acknowledgement (ACK) is received at the source.
The ACK is piggy-backed in the header of the returned packet
where an ARQN bit is set to either 1 or 0 depending on
whether or not the previous packet was successfully received.
In addition, a sequence number (SEQN) bit is used in the
packet header in order to provide a sequential ordering of data
packets in a stream and filter out retransmissions at the destination
. Forward Error Correction (FEC) is used on some
SCO and ACL packets in order to correct errors and reduce
the number of ACL retransmissions.
Both ACL and SCO packets have the same packet format.
It consists of a 72-bit access code used for message identification
and synchronization, a 54-bit header and a variable
length payload that contains either a voice or a data packet
depending on the type of link connection that is established
between a master and a slave.
A repetition code of rate 1/3 is applied to the header, and
a block code with minimum distance, d
min
, equal to 14, is applied
to the access code so that up to 13 errors are detected and
(d
min
- 1)/2 = 6 can be corrected. Note that uncorrected
errors in the header and the access code lead to a packet drop.
Voice packets have a total packet length of 366 bits including
the access code and header. A repetition code of 1/3 is used
for HV1 packet payload. On the other hand, DM and HV2
packet payloads use a 2/3 block code where every 10 bits of
information are encoded with 15 bits. DH and HV3 packets
do not have any encoding on their payload. HV packets do
INTERFERENCE EVALUATION OF BLUETOOTH AND IEEE 802.11b SYSTEMS
203
Figure 2. WLAN frame transmission scheme.
Table 1
Summary of error occurrences in the packet and actions taken in case errors
are not corrected.
Error location
Error correction
Action taken
Access code
d
min
= 14
Packet dropped
Packet header
1/3 repetition
Packet dropped
HV1 payload
1/3 repetition
Packet accepted
HV2 payload
2/3 block code
Packet accepted
HV3 payload
No FEC
Packet accepted
DM1, DM3, DM5 payload
2/3 block code
Packet dropped
DH1, DH3, DH5 payload
No FEC
Packet accepted
not have a CRC in the payload. In case of an error occurrence
in the payload, the packet is never dropped. Uncorrected errors
for DM and DH packets lead to dropped packets and the
application of the ARQ and SEQN schemes. Table 1 summarizes
the error occurrences in the packet and the actions taken
by the protocol.
2.2. IEEE 802.11b
The IEEE 802.11 standard [9] defines both the physical
(PHY) and medium access control (MAC) layer protocols
for WLANs. In this sequel, we shall be using WLAN and
802.11b interchangeably.
The IEEE 802.11 standard calls for three different PHY
specifications: frequency hopping (FH) spread spectrum, direct
sequence (DS) spread spectrum, and infrared (IR). The
transmit power for DS and FH devices is defined at a maximum
of 1 W and the receiver sensitivity is set to
-80 dBmW.
Antenna gain is limited to 6 dB maximum. In this work,
we focus on the 802.11b specification (DS spread spectrum)
since it is in the same frequency band as Bluetooth and the
most commonly deployed.
The basic data rate for the DS system is 1 Mbit/s encoded
with differential binary phase shift keying (DBPSK). Similarly
, a 2 Mbit/s rate is provided using differential quadrature
phase shift keying (DQPSK) at the same chip rate of
11
× 10
6
chips/s. Higher rates of 5.5 and 11 Mbit/s are also
available using techniques combining quadrature phase shift
keying and complementary code keying (CCK); all of these
systems use 22 MHz channels.
The IEEE 802.11 MAC layer specifications, common to all
PHYs and data rates, coordinate the communication between
stations and control the behavior of users who want to access
the network. The Distributed Coordination Function (DCF),
which describes the default MAC protocol operation, is based
on a scheme known as carrier-sense, multiple access, collision
avoidance (CSMA/CA). Both the MAC and PHY layers cooperate
in order to implement collision avoidance procedures.
The PHY layer samples the received energy over the medium
transmitting data and uses a clear channel assessment (CCA)
algorithm to determine if the channel is clear. This is accomplished
by measuring the RF energy at the antenna and determining
the strength of the received signal commonly known
as RSSI, or received signal strength indicator. In addition,
carrier sense can be used to determine if the channel is available
. This technique is more selective since it verifies that the
signal is the same carrier type as 802.11 transmitters. In all
of our simulations, we use carrier sense and not RSSI to determine
if the channel is busy. Thus, a Bluetooth signal will
corrupt WLAN packets, but it will not cause the WLAN to
defer transmission.
A virtual carrier sense mechanism is also provided at the
MAC layer. It uses the request-to-send (RTS) and clear-to-send
(CTS) message exchange to make predictions of future
traffic on the medium and updates the network allocation vector
(NAV) available in stations. Communication is established
when one of the wireless nodes sends a short RTS frame. The
receiving station issues a CTS frame that echoes the sender's
address. If the CTS frame is not received, it is assumed that a
collision occurred and the RTS process starts over. Regardless
of whether the virtual carrier sense routine is used or
not, the MAC is required to implement a basic access procedure
(depicted in figure 2) as follows. If a station has data to
send, it waits for the channel to be idle through the use of the
CSMA/CA algorithm. If the medium is sensed idle for a period
greater than a DCF interframe space (DIFS), the station
goes into a backoff procedure before it sends its frame. Upon
the successful reception of a frame, the destination station returns
an ACK frame after a Short interframe space (SIFS).
The backoff window is based on a random value uniformly
distributed in the interval
[CW
min
,
CW
max
], where CW
min
and CW
max
represent the Contention Window parameters. If
the medium is determined busy at any time during the backoff
slot, the backoff procedure is suspended. It is resumed after
the medium has been idle for the duration of the DIFS period.
If an ACK is not received within an ACK timeout interval, the
station assumes that either the data frame or the ACK was lost
204
GOLMIE ET AL.
and needs to retransmit its data frame by repeating the basic
access procedure.
Errors are detected by checking the Frame Check Sequence
(FCS) that is appended to the packet payload. In case
an error is found, the packet is dropped and is then later retransmitted
Integrated simulation model
In this section, we describe the methodology and platform
used to conduct the performance evaluation. The simulation
environment consists of detailed models for the RF channel,
the PHY, and MAC layers developed in C and OPNET (for the
MAC layer). These detailed simulation models constitute an
evaluation framework that is critical to studying the various
intricate effects between the MAC and PHY layers. Although
interference is typically associated with the RF channel modeling
and measured at the PHY layer, it can significantly impact
the performance of higher layer applications including
the MAC layer. Similarly, changes in the behavior of the
MAC layer protocol and the associated data traffic distribution
can play an important factor in the interference scenario
and affect the overall system performance.
Figure 3 shows a packet being potentially corrupted by two
interference packets. Consider that the desired packet is from
the WLAN and the interference packets are Bluetooth (the
figure is equally valid if the roles are reversed, except that
the frequencies of the packets will be different). For interference
to occur, the packets must overlap in both time and
frequency. That is, the interference packets must be within
the 22 MHz bandwidth of the WLAN. In a system with many
Bluetooth piconets, there may be interference from more than
one packet at any given time. We define a period of stationarity
(POS) as the time during which the interference is constant
. For example, t
i
t
t
i
+1
is such a period, as is
t
i
+1
t
t
i
+2
.
Even during a POS where there is one or more interferers,
the number and location of bit errors in the desired packet depends
on a number of factors: (1) the signal-to-interference
ratio (SIR) and the signal-to-noise ratio at the receiver, (2) the
type of modulation used by the transmitter and the interferer,
and (3) the channel model. For this reason, it is essential to
use accurate models of the PHY and channel, as described
below. Just because two packets overlap in time and frequency
does not necessary lead to bit errors and the consequent
packet loss. While one can use (semi-)analytic models
instead, such as approximating Bluetooth interference on
WLAN as a narrowband tone jammer, the use of detailed signal
processing-based models better allows one to handle multiple
simultaneous interferers.
In order to simulate the overall system, an interface module
was created that allows the MAC models to use the physical
layer and channel models. This interface module captures
all changes in the channel state (mainly in the energy level).
Consider the Bluetooth transmitter­channel­receiver chain of
processes. For a given packet, the transmitter creates a set of
Figure 3. Packet collision and placement of errors. The bit error rate (BER)
is roughly constant during each of the three indicated periods.
signal samples that are corrupted by the channel and input to
the receiver; interference may be present for all or only specific
periods of stationarity, as shown in figure 3. A similar
chain of processing occurs for an 802.11b packet. The interface
module is designed to process a packet at a time.
At the end of each packet transmission, the MAC layer
generates a data structure that contains all the information required
to process the packet. This structure includes a list of
all the interfering packets with their respective duration, timing
offset, frequency, and transmitted power. The topology of
the scenario is also included. The data structure is then passed
to the physical layer along with a stream of bits representing
the packet being transmitted. The physical layer returns the
bit stream after placing the errors resulting from the interference
.
3.1. MAC model
We used OPNET to develop a simulation model for the Bluetooth
and IEEE 802.11 protocols. For Bluetooth, we implemented
the access protocol according to the specifications [2].
We assume that a connection is already established between
the master and the slave and that the synchronization process
is complete. The Bluetooth hopping pattern algorithm is implemented
. Details of the algorithm are provided in section
2.1. A pseudo-random number generator is used instead
of the implementation specific circuitry that uses the master's
clock and 48-bit address to derive a random number.
For the IEEE 802.11 protocol, we used the model available
in the OPNET library and modified it to bypass the OPNET
radio model and to use our MAC/PHY interface module. We
focus in this study on the Direct Sequence mode which uses a
fixed frequency that occupies 22 MHz of the frequency band.
The center frequency is set to 2.437 GHz.
At the MAC layer, a set of performance metrics are defined
including probability of packet loss. Packet loss measures the
number of packets discarded at the MAC layer due to errors
in the bit stream. This measure is calculated after performing
error correction.
3.2. PHY model
The transmitters, channel, and receivers are implemented
at complex baseband.
For a given transmitter, inphase
INTERFERENCE EVALUATION OF BLUETOOTH AND IEEE 802.11b SYSTEMS
205
and quadrature samples are generated at a sampling rate of
44
· 10
6
per second. This rate provides four samples/symbol
for the 11 Mbit/s 802.11 mode, enough to implement a good
receiver.
It is also high enough to allow digital modulation
of the Bluetooth signal to account for its frequency hopping
. Specifically, since the Bluetooth signal is approximately
1 MHz wide, it can be modulated up to almost 22 MHz,
which is more than enough to cover the 11 MHz bandwidth
(one-sided) of the 802.11 signal. The received complex samples
from both the desired transmitter and the interferer(s) are
added together at the receiver.
While there are a number of possible Bluetooth receiver
designs, we chose to implement the noncoherent limiter-discriminator
(LD) receiver [3,14]. Its simplicity and relatively
low cost should make it the most common type for
many consumer applications. Details of the actual design are
given in [15].
In the 802.11b CCK receiver, each group of eight information
bits chooses a sequence of eight consecutive chips that
forms a symbol. As before, the inphase and quadrature components
of these chips are transmitted. The receiver looks at
the received symbol and decides which was the most likely
transmitted one. While one can implement this decoding procedure
by correlating against all 256 possible symbols, we
chose a slightly sub-optimal, but considerably faster architecture
similar to the Walsh­Hadamard transform; again details
can be found in [15].
3.3. Channel model
The channel model consists of a geometry-based propagation
model for the signals, as well as a noise model. For the indoor
channel, we apply a propagation model consisting of
two parts: (1) line-of-sight propagation (free-space) for the
first 8 m, and (2) a propagation exponent of 3.3 for distances
over 8 m. Consequently, the path loss in dB is given by
L
p
=




32.45
+ 20 log(f · d) if d &lt; 8 m,
58.3
+ 33 log d8
otherwise,
(1)
where f is the frequency in GHz, and d is the distance in meters
. This model is similar to the one used by Kamerman [10].
Assuming unit gain for the transmitter and receiver antennas
and ignoring additional losses, the received power in dBmW
is
P
R
= P
T
- L
p
,
(2)
where P
T
is the transmitted power also in dBmW. Equation
(2) is used for calculating the power received at a given
point due to either a Bluetooth or an 802.11 transmitter, since
this equation does not depend on the modulation method.
The main parameter that drives the PHY layer performance
is the signal-to-interference ratio between the desired signal
and the interfering signal. This ratio is given in dB by
SIR
= P
R
- P
I
,
(3)
where P
I
is the interference power at the receiver. In the absence
of interference, the bit error rate for either the Bluetooth
or WLAN system is almost negligible for the transmitter powers
and ranges under consideration.
To complete the channel model, noise is added to the received
samples, according to the specified SNR. In decibels,
the signal-to-noise ratio is defined by SNR
= P
R
-S
R
, where
P
R
is the received signal power, and S
R
is the receiver's sensitivity
in dBmW; this latter value is dependent on the receiver
model and so is an input parameter. Additive white Gaussian
noise (AWGN) is used to model the noise at the receivers.
3.4. Model validation
The results obtained from the simulation models were validated
against experimental and analytical results.
Since the implementation of the PHY layer required
choosing a number of design parameters, the first step in the
validation process is comparing the PHY results against theoretical
results. Complete BER curves of the Bluetooth and
802.11b systems are given in [15]; for the AWGN and flat
Rician channels without interference, all the results match
very closely to analytical bounds and other simulation results.
Also, the simulation results for both the MAC and PHY models
were compared and validated against analytical results for
packet loss given different traffic scenarios [6].
For the experimental testing, we use the topology in figure
4 and compare the packet loss observed for Bluetooth
voice and WLAN data with the simulation results in figure 5.
The experimental and simulation results are in good agreement
Simulation results
We present simulation results to evaluate the performance of
Bluetooth in the presence of WLAN interference and vice
versa. First, we consider the effects of parameters such as
transmitted power, offered load, hop rate, and traffic type on
interference. Second, we look at two realistic interference
scenarios to quantify the severity of the performance degradation
for the Bluetooth and WLAN systems.
4.1. Factors effecting interference
We first consider a four node topology consisting of two
WLAN devices and two Bluetooth devices (one master and
one slave) as shown in figure 4. The WLAN access point
(AP) is located at (0, 15) m, and the WLAN mobile is fixed at
(
0, 1) m. The Bluetooth slave device is fixed at (0, 0) m and
the master is fixed at (1, 0) m.
In an effort to control the interference on Bluetooth and
WLAN, we define two scenarios. In the first scenario, we
let the mobile be the generator of 802.11 data, while the AP
is the sink. In this case, the interference is from the mobile
sending data packets to the AP and receiving acknowledgments
(ACKs) from it. Since most of the WLAN traffic is
206
GOLMIE ET AL.
Figure 4. Topology 1. Two WLAN devices and one Bluetooth piconet.
Table 2
Summary of the scenarios.
Scenario
Desired
Interferer
WLAN
WLAN
signal
signal
AP
mobile
1
Bluetooth
WLAN
Sink
Source
2
WLAN
Bluetooth
Source
Sink
originating close to the Bluetooth piconet, both the master and
the slave may suffer from serious interference. In the second
scenario, the traffic is generated at the AP and received at the
WLAN mobile. Because the data packets are generally longer
then the ACKs, this is a more critical scenario for the WLAN
then when the mobile is the source. Table 2 summarizes the
two scenarios.
For Bluetooth, we consider two types of applications,
voice and data. For voice, we assume a symmetric stream
of 64 Kbit/s each way using HV1 packet encapsulation. For
data traffic, we consider a source that generates DM5 packets.
The packet interarrival time is exponentially distributed, and
its mean in seconds is computed according to
t
B
= 2 × n
s
× T
s
,
(4)
where  is the offered load; n
s
is the number of slots occupied
by a packet. For DM5, n
s
= 5. T
s
is the slot size equal to
625 µs.
For WLAN, we use the 11 Mbit/s mode and consider a
data application. Typical applications for WLAN could be
ftp or http. However, since we are mainly interested in the
MAC layer performance, we abstract the parameters for the
application model to packet size and offered load and do not
model the entire TCP/IP stack. We fix the packet payload to
12,000 bits which is the maximum size for the MAC payload
data unit, and vary . The packet interarrival time in seconds,
t
W
, is exponentially distributed, and its mean is computed acTable
3
Simulation parameters
Simulation parameters
Values
Propagation delay
5 µs/km
Length of simulation run
30 s
Bluetooth parameters
ACL Baseband Packet Encapsulation
DM5
SCO Baseband Packet Encapsulation
HV1
Transmitted Power
1 mW
WLAN parameters
Transmitted power
25 mW
Packet header
224 bits
Packet payload
12,000 bits
cording to
t
W
= 192/1,000,000 + 12,224/11,000,000

,
(5)
where the 192-bit PLCP header is sent at 1 Mbit/s and the
payload at 11 Mbit/s. Unless specified otherwise, we use the
configuration and system parameters shown in table 3.
For scenarios 1 and 2, we run 15 trials using a different
random seed for each trial. In addition to plotting the mean
value, confidence intervals, showing plus and minus two standard
deviations, are also included. From figures 5 and 6, one
sees that the statistical variation around the mean values are
very small. In addition to the comparisons with analytical and
experimental results described in section 3.4, this fact provides
further validation for the results.
4.1.1. WLAN transmission power
First, we look at the effect on Bluetooth of increasing the
WLAN transmission power in scenario 1; that is, increasing
the interferer transmission power on the victim signal. Since
power control algorithms exist in many WLAN implementa-tions
, it is important to consider how varying the transmitted
power changes the interference. However, since Bluetooth
was designed as a low power device, we fix its transmitter
power at 1 mW for all simulations.
We fix WLAN  to 60% for different Bluetooth traffic
types and values of . In figure 5(a), we note a saturation
effect around 10 mW. A threshold, which is close to 22/79,
corresponds to the probability that Bluetooth is hopping in the
WLAN occupied band. Thus, increasing the WLAN transmission
power beyond 10 mW does not affect the Bluetooth
packet loss. Between 1 and 5 mW, a small change in the
WLAN transmitted power triples the Bluetooth packet loss.
Please note the relative positions of the packet loss curves for
different values of  between 1 and 5 mW; as  increases, the
packet loss is higher. Also, note that Bluetooth voice has the
lowest packet loss, partly due to its short packet size. A second
reason for the low loss probability is that voice packets
are rejected only if there are errors in the access code or
packet headers, cf. table 1. A packet may be accepted with
a relatively large number of bit errors in the payload, which
may lead to a substantial reduction in subjective voice quality.
Figure 5(b) shows the probability of packet loss for the
WLAN mobile device.
This corresponds to ACKs being
INTERFERENCE EVALUATION OF BLUETOOTH AND IEEE 802.11b SYSTEMS
207
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5. WLAN
= 60%. (a) Scenario 1. Probability of packet loss for the Bluetooth slave. (b) Scenario 1. Probability of packet loss for the WLAN
mobile. (c) Scenario 2. Probability of packet loss for the WLAN mobile.
dropped at the WLAN source. The general trend is that the
packet loss decreases as the WLAN transmitted power increases
. However, we notice a slight "bump" between 1 and
5 mW. This is due to the effect of closed-loop interference.
The WLAN source increases its transmitted power and causes
more interference on the Bluetooth devices; as a result, there
are more retransmissions in both the Bluetooth and WLAN
piconets, which causes more lost ACKs at the WLAN source.
Next, we consider the effect of increasing the WLAN
transmission power on the WLAN performance in scenario 2.
From figure 5(c), we observe that even if the WLAN transmission
power is fifty times more than the Bluetooth transmission
power (fixed at 1 mW), the packet loss for the WLAN
does not change. This leads us to an interesting observation
on power control. Basically, we note that increasing the
transmission power does not necessarily improve the performance
. However, decreasing the transmission power is usu-ally
a "good neighbor" strategy that may help reduce the interference
on other devices.
4.1.2. Offered load
The offered load, also referred to in some cases as duty cycle
, is an interesting parameter to track. Consider scenario 1
where Bluetooth is the interferer and fix the WLAN transmission
power to 25 mW. We observe that for the WLAN, the
packet loss is proportional to the Bluetooth offered load as
shown in figure 6. For  equal 20%, 50%, and 100%, the
packet loss is 7%, 15%, and 25%, respectively. This observation
has been confirmed analytically in [6], where the packet
error is shown to depend not only on the offered load of the
interferer system but also on the packet sizes of both systems.
Also note that the probability of loss for the 30% WLAN of-208
GOLMIE ET AL.
Figure 6. Scenario 2. Probability of packet loss for the WLAN mobile.
fered load is slightly higher than for the 60% WLAN offered
load. However, this difference is statistically insignificant.
The significance of the packet size is apparent in figures
5(a) and (c), where short Bluetooth voice packets lead
to less packet loss for Bluetooth but cause more interference
for WLAN. However, for the WLAN 11 Mbit/s rate, the effect
of changing the WLAN packet size over the range 1,000
to 12,000 bits has very little effect on the performance of both
the WLAN and Bluetooth, and that is due to the relatively
short transmission time of the WLAN packet. At the 1 Mbit/s
rate, WLAN packets of the same bit lengths take considerably
longer to transmit, and the effect of packet size is somewhat
more pronounced. For a further discussion of the 1 Mbit/s
case, please see [7].
4.1.3. Bluetooth hop rate
In order to highlight the effect of the Bluetooth hop rate on
WLAN, we use different packet types, DM1, DM3, and DM5;
these packets occupy 1, 3, and 5 time slots, respectively. The
Bluetooth hop rate is determined by the number of time slots
occupied by a packet. Thus, the hop rate is 1600, 533, and
320 hops/s for DM1, DM3, and DM5 packets, respectively.
The offered load for Bluetooth is set to 100%. The results in
table 4 clearly indicate that a faster hop rate leads to higher
packet losses (44%, 28%, and 26% for DM1, DM3 and DM5,
respectively). Note that the results are rather insensitive to the
WLAN offered load.
4.1.4. Bluetooth traffic type
The question here is, whether Bluetooth voice effects WLAN
more than Bluetooth data, and vice versa.
We use three
types of packets for voice encapsulation, namely, HV1, HV2,
and HV3. HV1 represents the worst case of interference for
WLAN as shown in table 5 with 44% packet loss. HV2 and
HV3, which contain less error correction and more user information
, are sent less often and, therefore, interfer less with
WLAN (25% and 16% for HV2 and HV3, respectively). The
Table 4
Scenario 2. Probability of WLAN packet loss versus Bluetooth hop rate.
BT
WLAN
= 30%
WLAN
= 60%
DM1
0.449
0.449
DM3
0.286
0.277
DM5
0.269
0.248
Table 5
Scenario 2. Probability of WLAN packet loss versus Bluetooth traffic type.
BT
WLAN
= 30%
WLAN
= 60%
Voice
HV1
0.446
0.470
HV2
0.253
0.257
HV3
0.166
0.169
Data,
= 60%
0.191
0.177
Table 6
Scenario 1. Probability of Bluetooth packet loss versus Bluetooth traffic
type.
BT
WLAN
= 30%
WLAN
= 60%
Voice
HV1
0.077
0.141
HV2
0.075
0.149
HV3
0.069
0.136
Data,
= 60%
0.2089
0.210
WLAN packet loss with Bluetooth data interference is 19%.
Please note that the results do not depend on the WLAN offered
load.
On the other hand, the probability of packet loss for Bluetooth
data (20%) is higher than for Bluetooth voice (7%) as
shown in table 6. Note that doubling the WLAN offered load
to 60% doubles the Bluetooth voice packet loss. Also, since
all three types of voice packets suffer the same packet loss,
it is preferable to use HV3, which causes less interference
on the WLAN. The error correction coding in HV1 and HV2
packets may provide greater range in a noise-limited environment
, but this coding is far too weak to protect the packets
from interference. Instead, it is the frequency hopping ability
of Bluetooth that limits the damage done by the WLAN.
4.1.5. Bluetooth transmission power
While most Bluetooth devices will be operating at 1 mW, the
specification also allows higher transmitter powers. Table 7
shows the probability of packet loss for both Bluetooth and
the WLAN for three values of the BT transmitter power and
two types of Bluetooth traffic. As expected, higher transmitter
powers lead to more lost WLAN packets, regardless of the
BT traffic type. Increasing the power from 1 to 10 mW leads
to approximately a 50% increase in WLAN loss. Conversely,
the Bluetooth packet error rate decreases. It still not clear how
beneficial this decrease is for Bluetooth; even a loss probability
of 0.0335 may lead to unacceptable voice quality.
4.1.6. Bluetooth packet error correction
So far, the results shown for the Bluetooth data are with DM5
packets, which use a 2/3 block code on the packet payload.
In order to show the effect of error correction on the probabil-INTERFERENCE
EVALUATION OF BLUETOOTH AND IEEE 802.11b SYSTEMS
209
Figure 7. Scenario 1. Probability of packet loss for the Bluetooth slave.
Table 7
Scenario 2. Probability of packet loss versus Bluetooth transmission power
(mW). WLAN
= 60%.
BT traffic
BT power
BT loss
WLAN loss
(mW)
probability
probability

= 60%
1
0.2125
0.0961
2.5
0.2085
0.1227
10
0.1733
0.1358
Voice
1
0.1417
0.1253
2.5
0.1179
0.1609
10
0.0335
0.1977
ity of packet loss, we repeat scenario 1 and compare the results
given in figures 5(a) and 7, obtained with DM5 and DH5
packets, respectively. As expected, the probability of packet
loss for DM5 packets (figure 5(a)) is slightly less than for
DH5 packets (figure 7) for WLAN transmission powers less
than 5 mW. Thus, for low levels of interference, a 2/3 block
code can reduce the probability of loss by 4%. However, for
WLAN transmission powers above 5 mW, the probability of
packet loss is the same for both DM5 and DH5 packets.
4.2. Realistic interference topologies
In this section, we consider two practical interference topologies
. While they appear to be somewhat different, they actually
complement each other. The first one has the WLAN
device, in the midst of the Bluetooth piconets, acting at the
source, while the second one has the WLAN access point acting
as the source.
4.2.1. Topology 2
We first look at the topology illustrated in figure 8. It consists
of one WLAN AP located at (0, 15) m, and one WLAN
mobile at (0, 0) m. The WLAN traffic is generated at the mobile
, while the AP returns acknowledgments. The distance
between the WLAN AP and mobile is d
W
= 15 m. There
Figure 8. Topology 2. Two WLAN devices and ten Bluetooth piconets.
Table 8
Experiment 3 results.
BT traffic
WLAN
BT loss
WLAN loss
d
B
= 1 m
d
B
= 2 m

= 30%
30%
0.056
0.157
0.121
60%
0.060
0.188
0.170

= 60%
30%
0.057
0.243
0.405
60%
0.061
0.247
0.381
Voice
30%
0.009
0.104
1
60%
0.008
0.106
1
are ten Bluetooth piconets randomly placed, covering a disk.
The center of the disk is located at (0, 0) and its radius is
r
= 10 m. We define d
B
as the distance between a Bluetooth
master and slave pair. d
B
= 1 m for half of the master and
slave pairs, while d
B
= 2 m for the other half of the master
and slave pairs.
In this case, the main interference on Bluetooth is caused
by the WLAN source located in the center of the disk; the aggregation
of the ten piconets affects the WLAN source. We
found that when the WLAN system is not operating, the Bluetooth
packet loss is negligible (less than 1%). Table 8 gives
the packet loss for the Bluetooth and WLAN devices. The
packet loss for the Bluetooth devices is averaged over the
master and slave devices and split into two groups: piconets
with d
B
= 1 m and piconets with d
B
= 2 m. For WLAN, the
packet loss is measured at the source. It is effectively zero at
the sink.
We observe that the WLAN packet loss depends on the
Bluetooth traffic load value, . As  is varied from 30% to
60%, the WLAN packet loss is significantly changed from
12% to 40%. However, the WLAN packet loss is insensitive
to the WLAN offered load. Consistent with previous results,
Bluetooth voice represents the worst case interference scenario
for WLAN.
210
GOLMIE ET AL.
In general, the Bluetooth packet loss for d
B
= 1 m is less
than for d
B
= 2 m. The reason is that when the Bluetooth
signal is stronger (over a shorter distance), the impact of interference
is less significant.
4.2.2. Topology 3
We next consider the topology given in figure 9. It includes
one WLAN AP and four WLAN mobile devices. The WLAN
AP is located at (0, 15) m, and it is the source of the traffic
generation. The four WLAN mobile devices are placed
on a two-dimensional grid at (
-1, 1), (1, 1), (-1, -1), and
(
1,
-1) m. In this topology, there are four Bluetooth piconets,
each consisting of a master­slave device pair. The placement
of the Bluetooth devices is as shown in the figure.
In this case, we are looking at the effect of Bluetooth piconets
on the four WLAN sink devices. The packet loss measure
for WLAN is averaged over the four devices. As shown
in table 9, the impact of WLAN interference on Bluetooth is
minimal, given that the WLAN source is far from the Bluetooth
piconets. As expected, the WLAN packet loss depends
on the Bluetooth traffic conditions, and it is rather insensitive
to the WLAN traffic activity. With Bluetooth voice, the
WLAN packet loss is close to 84%. It is 57% for Bluetooth
data with WLAN loads of
= 30, 60%.
Concluding remarks
We presented results on the performance of Bluetooth and
WLAN operating in the 2.4 GHz ISM band based on detailed
channel, MAC, and PHY layer models for both systems. The
evaluation framework used allows us to study the impact of
interference in a closed loop environment where two systems
are affecting each other, and explore the MAC and PHY layer
interactions in each system.
We are able to draw some useful conclusions based on our
results. First, we note that power control may have limited
benefits in this environment. Increasing the WLAN transmission
power to even fifty times the power of Bluetooth is not
sufficient to reduce the WLAN packet loss. On the other hand,
limiting the WLAN power, may help avoid interference to
Bluetooth. Second, using a slower hop rate for Bluetooth (i.e.
longer packet sizes) may cause less interference to WLAN.
Third, Bluetooth voice represents the worst type of interference
for WLAN. In addition, the WLAN performance seems
to degrade as the Bluetooth offered load is increased. Finally,
the use of error correcting block codes in the Bluetooth payload
does not improve performance. The errors caused by
interference are often too many to correct.
Overall, the results are dependent on the traffic distribution
. Yet, there may be little room for parameter optimization
especially for the practical scenarios. Not only does the complexity
of the interactions and the number of parameters to adjust
make the optimization problem intractable, but choosing
an objective function is very dependent on the applications
and the scenario. Thus, achieving acceptable performance for
Figure 9. Topology 3. Five WLAN devices and four Bluetooth piconets.
Table 9
Experiment 4 results.
BT traffic
WLAN
BT loss
WLAN loss

= 30%
30%
0.007
0.574
60%
0.006
0.580

= 60%
30%
0.007
0.576
60%
0.006
0.580
Voice
30%
0.002
0.836
60%
0.001
0.828
a particular system comes at the expense of the other system's
throughput. Therefore, we believe that the primary solutions
to this problem lie in the development of coexistence mechanisms
References
[1] BlueHoc: Bluetooth Performance Evaluation Tool, Open-Source
(2001) http://oss.software.ibm.com/developerworks/
opensource/~bluehoc
[2] Bluetooth Special Interest Group, Specifications of the Bluetooth system
, Vol. 1, v.1.0B Core, and Vol. 2, v1.0B Profiles (December 1999).
[3] T. Ekvetchavit and Z. Zvonar, Performance of phase-locked loop receiver
in digital FM systems, in: Ninth IEEE International Symposium
on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, Vol. 1 (1998)
pp. 381­385.
[4] G. Ennis, Impact of Bluetooth on 802.11 direct sequence, IEEE
P802.11 Working Group Contribution, IEEE P802.11-98/319 (September
1998).
[5] D. Fumolari, Link performance of an embedded Bluetooth personal
area network, in: Proceedings of IEEE ICC'01, Helsinki, Finland (June
2001).
[6] N. Golmie and F. Mouveaux, Interference in the 2.4 GHz ISM band:
Impact on the Bluetooth access control performance, in: Proceedings
of IEEE ICC'01, Helsinki, Finland (June 2001).
INTERFERENCE EVALUATION OF BLUETOOTH AND IEEE 802.11b SYSTEMS
211
[7] N. Golmie, R.E. Van Dyck, and A. Soltanian, Interference of Bluetooth
and IEEE 802.11: Simulation modeling and performance evaluation
, in: Proceedings of the Fourth ACM International Workshop on
Modeling, Analysis, and Simulation of Wireless and Mobile Systems,
MSWIM'01, Rome, Italy (July 2001).
[8] I. Howitt, V. Mitter and J. Gutierrez, Empirical study for IEEE 802.11
and Bluetooth interoperability, in: Proceedings of IEEE Vehicular
Technology Conference (VTC) (Spring 2001).
[9] IEEE Standard 802-11, IEEE standard for wireless LAN Medium Access
Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) specification (June
1997).
[10] A. Kamerman, Coexistence between Bluetooth and IEEE 802.11 CCK:
Solutions to avoid mutual interference, IEEE P802.11 Working Group
Contribution, IEEE P802.11-00/162r0 (July 2000).
[11] A. Kamerman and N. Erkocevic, Microwave oven interference on wireless
LANs operating in the 2.4 GHz ISM band, in: Proceedings of the
8th IEEE International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile
Radio Communications, Vol. 3 (1997) pp. 1221­1227.
[12] J. Lansford, A. Stephens and R. Nevo, Wi-Fi (802.11b) and Bluetooth:
Enabling coexistence, IEEE Network Magazine (September/October
2001).
[13] S. Shellhammer, Packet error rate of an IEEE 802.11 WLAN in the
presence of Bluetooth, IEEE P802.15 Working Group Contribution,
IEEE P802.15-00/133r0 (May 2000).
[14] M.K. Simon and C.C. Wang, Differential versus limiter-discriminator
detection of narrow-band FM, IEEE Transactions on Communications
COM-31(11) (November 1983) 1227­1234.
[15] A. Soltanian and R.E. Van Dyck, Physical layer performance for coexistence
of Bluetooth and IEEE 802.11b, in: Virginia Tech. Symposium
on Wireless Personal Communications (June 2001).
[16] M. Takai, R. Bagrodia, A. Lee and M. Gerla, Impact of channel models
on simulation of large scale wireless networks, in: Proceedings of
ACM/IEEE MSWIM'99, Seattle, WA (August 1999).
[17] S. Unawong, S. Miyamoto and N. Morinaga, Techniques to improve the
performance of wireless LAN under ISM interference environments, in:
Fifth Asia-Pacific Conference on Communications, 1999 and Fourth
Optoelectronics and Communications Conference, Vol. 1 (1999) pp.
802­805.
[18] J. Zyren, Reliability of IEEE 802.11 WLANs in presence of Bluetooth
radios, IEEE P802.11 Working Group Contribution, IEEE P802.15-99/073r0
(September 1999).
[19] S. Zurbes, W. Stahl, K. Matheus and J. Haartsen, Radio network performance
of Bluetooth, in: Proceedings of IEEE International Conference
on Communications, ICC 2000, New Orleans, LA, Vol. 3 (June 2000)
pp. 1563­1567.
Nada Golmie received the M.S.E degree in computer
engineering from Syracuse University, Syracuse
, NY, in 1993, and the Ph.D. degree in computer
science from University of Maryland, College Park,
MD, in 2002. Since 1993, she has been a research
engineer at the advanced networking technologies
division at the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST). Her research in traffic management
and flow control led to several papers presented
at professional conferences, journals and numerous
contributions to international standard organizations and industry led consor-tia
. Her current work is focused on the performance evaluation of protocols
for Wireless Personal Area Networks. Her research interests include modeling
and performance analysis of network protocols, media access control,
and Quality of Service for IP and wireless network technologies. She is the
vice-chair of the IEEE 802.15 Coexistence Task Group.
E-mail: nada.golmie@nist.gov
Robert E. Van Dyck received the B.E and M.E.E
degrees from Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken
, NJ, in 1985 and 1986, respectively, and the
Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the North
Carolina State University at Raleigh in 1992. Since
June 2000, he has been a member of the Advanced
Network Technologies Division of the National Institute
of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg,
MD. Prior to that, he was an Assistant Professor in
the Department of Electrical Engineering, the Pennsylvania
State University, University Park, PA. During 1999, he was a Summer
Faculty Research Fellow at Rome Laboratory. His other previous affiliations
include GEC-Marconi Electronic Systems, Wayne, NJ (1995­1996),
the Center for Computer Aids for Industrial Productivity, Rutgers University,
Piscataway, NJ (1992­1995), the Computer Science Corporation, Research
Triangle Park NC, (1989), and the Communications Laboratory, Raytheon
Co., Marlborough, MA (1985­1988). His present research interests are in
self-organization of sensor networks, multimedia communications and networking
, and source and channel coding for wireless communications.
Amir Soltanian received his M.S. degree from
Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran, in
1994. He has been working in the industry for 6
years doing research on GSM receivers. Currently,
he is a guest researcher at National Institute of Standards
and Technology. His current research is the
study of the interference cancellation methods for
the physical layer of the Bluetooth and IEEE802.11
WLAN.
Arnaud Tonnerre is a graduate student at the
École Nationale Supérieure des Telecommunications
(ENST) in Bretagne, France. He is currently doing
an internship at the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) in Gaithersburg, MD. He
will receive the Diplome d'Ingenieur in June 2003.
His research interests are in wireless personal area
networks.
Olivier Rébala received a computer science degree
from the Institut supérieur d'informatique, de
modélisation et de leurs applications (ISIMA) in
Clermont-Ferrand, France, in September 2001. He
is currently a Guest Researcher at the National Institute
of Standards and Technology (NIST) in the
advanced networking technologies division. His research
interests includes the performance evaluation
of wireless networking protocols.
