Using Case-Based Reasoning in Traffic Pattern Recognition for Best Resource Management in 3G Networks
ABSTRACT
With the underlying W-CDMA technique in 3G networks, 
resource management is a very significant issue as it can directly 
influence the system capacity and also lead to system QoS. 
However, the resource can be dynamically managed in order to 
maintain the QoS according to the SLA. In this paper, CBR is used 
as part of an intelligent-based agent management system. It uses 
information from previously managed situations to maintain the 
QoS in order to meet the SLA. The results illustrate the 
performance of an agent in traffic pattern recognition in order to 
identify the specific type of problem and finally propose the right 
solution.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
C.2.3
[Computer-Communication Networks]: Network
Operations - network management, network monitoring.   
I.6.6 [Simulation and Modeling]: Simulation Output Analysis.

General terms
Algorithms, Management, Performance

INTRODUCTION
The third generation (3G) cellular system has been developed to
satisfy increasing customer demands for higher bit-rate access in
order to provide wireless Internet access anytime and anywhere. In
addition, 3G networks will integrate different type of services like
voice, data, and video.
With W-CDMA, all users share the same spectrum and use codes
to identify themselves. Hence the whole bandwidth can be reused
in every cell. The system is considered a soft capacity system as all
users simultaneously transmit so increasing the interference seen by
others. The system capacity is, therefore, limited by the total
interference that occurs from other users (in the case of the network
being uplink-capacity limited) or other base stations (in the case of
the network being downlink-capacity limited) and the background
noise. The benefit of this technique is therefore providing the
flexible, higher bandwidth services, and maintaining the best
system capacity. On the other hand, it leads to more complexity in
resource management.
Previous work [1] introduced the use of intelligent agents in
managing the resources to meet the service level agreement (SLA)
when congestion occurs. It shows that by using intelligent agents
together with the assignment and admission scheme, the system
environment can be monitored and the policy that is suitable for
that particular situation will be selected and applied to the system.
Also the quality of service (QoS) for each particular class of
customer can be monitored and controlled according to the SLA. In
[2], Case-Based Reasoning (CBR) is introduced as a mean of
giving the agent more "intelligence". The aim of using CBR is so
that the problem can be automatically solved by referring to a
similar traffic pattern that the system has seen before and kept in
the case library. The end solution from the previous case can then
be applied immediately to give a fast and efficient response. In this
paper, a wider range of traffic situations will be illustrated, which
will also show the benefit of using CBR in order to identify
different traffic patterns and to propose the best solution. In
addition, results show the outcome of system flexibility in giving
different priority patterns to customers according to the system
requirements.
The paper is organised as follows. The agent system and
architecture for the multi-agent system are described in section 2.
In section 3, the implementation of CBR in SLA-based control by
the agent will be introduced. The assignment and admission
scheme is presented in section 4 and section 5 covers the simulation
model. Traffic pattern recognition and numerical results are
illustrated and discussed in section 6. Lastly, the conclusions of the
paper are in section 7.

AGENT SYSTEM AND ARCHITECTURE
Critical in a radio network is the allocation of bandwidth to radio
cells in order to avoid local congestion or degradation of the QoS
and it is generally the capacity of the wireless link to the user that

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
MSWiM'04, October 4­6, 2004, Venezia, Italy. 
Copyright 2004 ACM 1-58113-953-5/04/0010...$5.00.

252
limits the overall system capacity, rather than any back-haul part of
the network.
In [3], an agent approach for a distributed resource management
system is introduced. The main reason for using intelligent agents
is to give greater autonomy to the base stations; this gives an
increase in flexibility to deal with new situations in traffic load and
to decrease the information load (the messaging resulting from
taking, or determining control actions) on the network.
In the past, mobile network operators have generally restricted the
customer to only one service provider.  With the influence of the
Internet, more widespread choice of service providers (SPs) will be
available to 3G users. By using an agent, it would be possible to
allow selection of SP by offering on price, QoS, or value added
service.
In this work, each agent uses three layers taking action and 
decisions on different timescales: reactive, local planning and cooperative
planning.
As an individual connection must have the decision made in real-time
, the reactive layer is designed for a very fast response. More 
complex functions have been implemented at the planning layers. 
Generally the local planning layer is concerned with long-term 
actions within its own instance, whereas the co-operative layer is 
concerned with long-term actions between peer agents, or with 
other types of agent. The reactive layer is, therefore very simple, 
implementing policies being passed down by the higher layer. This 
is discussed in more detail later in the paper.
CBR IN SLA-BASED CONTROL
CBR is an Artificial intelligence (AI) approach that can allow the 
agent to learn from past successes. It is a method that finds the 
solution to the new problem by analysing previously solved 
problems, called cases, or adapting old solutions to meet new 
demands.

Figure 1  Case-based reasoning process model
(Based on the CBR cycle in [4])
Figure 1 shows the process model of the case-based reasoning. The
process of CBR starts when there is a new problem or new case
happening. The first step is case retrieval, which uses the
characterizing indexes of the event to find the best-match solved
case(s) from the case library. The solution from the retrieved
case(s) will be reused.
However, the solution might need to be modified to fit the new 
situation as the new situation will rarely match the old one exactly: 
this step is called "revising". Once the new solution is proposed, 
the next step is to test it with the real environment. The result is 
either success or failure. If the solution fails, a monitoring process 
will analyse the failure, repair the working solution, and test again. 
If the solution succeeds, this new solution will be indexed and 
retained in the case library to use for future problem solving.
The work shown in [5] gives an example of using CBR in network
traffic control by using it to control traffic flow in the standard
public switched telephone network of the Ile de France. In another
work in [6], CBR is used to correct the error estimation of the
required bandwidth computed by conventional connection
admission control schemes.
In the work described in this paper, CBR is used to recognise traffic
patterns as congestion occurs in a 3G network and to define the
policies to respond to that congestion in the reactive layer of the
resource agent. Congestion here means the situation where system
could not maintain the QoS required by the SLA. (This is explained
in more detail in section 5)
3.2  Resource agent
In this work the resource agent is the focus of attention as it is an
important agent in managing the resource within the network.  The
architecture of the resource agent is illustrated in figure 2.


Figure 2  Resource agent internal architecture

The reactive layer is designed to be fast, performing the same
function that would be in a conventional RNC (Radio Network
Controller), assigning the connection a Node B, and performing
Previous 
Cases
General
Knowledge
Suggestion

Solution

Confirmed

Solution

RETRIEVE
Problem
Retrieve
Case
Tested /
Repaired
Case
Solved
Case
Case
New
New

Case

Learned
Case
RETAIN
REUSE
REVISE
Co-operative Planning Layer

-  Action between cells

Local Planning

Layer


-  Act on changing QoS within cell

Case - Based Reasoning
Reactive Layer
Assignment
OK
OK
CAC

Exception
handle
No
Yes
No
Yes
Assigned
request
Modified request

Set up
connection
Reject
Request
pol
i
cy
pol
i
cy
pol
i
cy
S
t
at
us
re
p
o
rti
ng
253
CAC (Connection Admission Control) but it does this according to
policies assigned by the planning layer.
The connection request (containing information about the service
provider, QoS, type of connection) is first considered for
assignment to a Node B using an algorithm or set of rules passed
down from the planning layer. As a result, the system performance
can be monitored at all times. Any congestion occurring can be
detected and reported to the planning layer which, will then find the
best solution using the CBR approach in order to maintain the SLA.

ASSIGNMENT AND ADMISSION SCHEME
Assignment and admission control together determine which base
station will have power control over a mobile, which means that
base station must have available bandwidth to support the new call,
and also must make sure that none of the existing connection will
be dropped.
A great deal of work has been done in this area. In [7], a
comparison is made between a transmitted power-based call
admission control (TPCAC) that protects the ongoing calls and a
received power-based call admission control (RPCAC) that blocks
new calls when the total received power at a base station exceeds a
threshold. The result shows that the RPCAC scheme is found to
offer significant performance benefits. In [8], the number-based
CAC and interference-based CAC are compared. SIR-based CAC
(signal-to-interference based CAC) has been proposed in [9], the
benefit being in improving the system performance at traffic hot-spots
.
In this paper, a combination between the ideal scheme and SIR-based
CAC has been chosen with uplink capacity limitation (which
means the signal-to-interference of the received signal from mobile
to base station is calculated) As for the ideal scheme, the system
has to make sure none of the existing connections will be dropped
when accepting a new connection request. Hence, two perfect
power control loops are run to verify that the new request can really
be accepted; otherwise it would be blocked or put into the buffer.
The admission process is as follow :
- With the new connection request, the new mobile's
transmitted power is estimated in order to get the target SIR.
(the open power control in section 5.4)
-  If the estimated transmitted power is in the accepted range, it
means the new mobile can make a connection. Otherwise, it
will be blocked or held in the buffer.
-  Set up the new connection and perform the first perfect power
control loop. With this, the new transmitted power that is
supposed to give each connection the target SIR can be
determined.
-  The second perfect power control loop is performed to achieve
the actual SIR for each connection as a result of accepting a
new connection request.
-  If any existing connection would be dropped (by having SIR
less than the threshold), the new connection is still rejected
otherwise it is accepted and the connection can be made.
The rejected connection request will be put into a queue until the
next calculation or new call arrival and it will be blocked at the
expiry of a timer: setting the timer to zero means that a request is
immediately accepted or rejected. Furthermore, the base station
serving the mobile can be reassigned at anytime during the
connection if the current base station cannot provide the required
link quality.
SIMULATION MODEL
The simulation model has been implemented in MatLab. The
system used for the results in this paper consists of 9 hexagonal
cells (25 cells have been used for other work but the large model
suffers from an excessively long run time) and each cell has its own
base station with an omni-directional antenna placed at the centre
of the cell. A number of mobiles have been generated randomly
according to the input traffic. When considering different classes of
user, it is quite common to use three classes: bronze, silver, and
gold. In the results described here, 50% of the users are bronze,
30% are silver and 20% are gold. It is assumed that the gold
customers will pay the highest service charge followed by silver
and bronze customers, so that the gold customer is paying for the
best service and more flexibility than the others.
5.1  Radio Propagation Model
In cellular systems, radio propagation is crucially influenced by the
path loss according to the distance, log-normal shadowing, and
multipath fading. The relationship between the transmitted power
and received power can be expressed as [9].
0
10
/
10
)
(
P
r
r
P


=


(1)

where P(r) is the received power, P0 is transmitted power, r is the 
distance from the base station to mobile,
in decibels has a normal
distribution with zero mean and standard deviation of
(typical
value of 8 dB), and

2
represents the gain (typical values of
in a
cellular environment are 2.7-4.0).
5.2  Traffic Model
The model consists of two traffic types, voice and video. The
model has been simplified from the three type traffic model that
also included data traffic, which was used in [2]. The reason in
simplifying the traffic model is because modelling data traffic to
the level of packet results in unrealistically long simulation times.
5.2.1  Voice traffic
Voice traffic is considered to be real-time traffic. The common
model for a single voice source is illustrated by the ON-OFF
process. It consists of two stages, active (ON) and silent (OFF) 
stage, with a transition rate
µ from ON to OFF and  from OFF to
ON stage.
Figure 3 illustrates the ON-OFF model. The silent period is
assumed to be the period that cannot be used to transmit data
message or voice call.







Figure 3  Traffic model for voice call (ON-OFF model)
Silent
Active
Duration in silent
state : exponential
distribution
Duration in active
state : exponential
distribution

µ

1
µ
1
254
To simplify the simulation, the approach of [9] is used with an
activity factor of 0.45 is used. The transmission rate for voice
traffic is assumed to be 8kbit/s and mean holding time is
180second.
5.2.2  Video traffic
Video traffic is also considered as real-time traffic. The common
model for video source is illustrated by the discrete-state
continuous time Markov process illustrated in figure 4.
The bit rate of video traffic is quantized into finite discrete level (0
A 2A... MA). Transitions between levels occur with exponential
transition rates that may depend on the current level. [11]



Figure 4  Video source model  (Discrete-state continuous time
Markov process)
The
and  are the state transitions and they are obtained by:


+
=
M
N
04458
.
5
1
9
.
3

(2)


=
9
.
3
(3)
where N is a Number of aggregated video sources (typical
assumption 1) and M is a number of quantization levels (typical
assumption 8).

Implementing this video traffic model in the simulation causes
simulation times to be very long. Many authors therefore simplify
this by using activity factor. [9][12]  Here, an activity factor of 1
has been assumed for the real-time video source as use in [9]. The
transmission rate for video traffic is assumed to be 64, 144, or
384kbit/s and mean holding time is 300 second.
5.3  Receiver Model
For the uplink capacity limited, the SIR of each transmission is
calculated at the base station and it can be expressed as follows,
(based on [13])
thermal
er
ra
N
I
I
R
W
SIR
+
+





=
int
int
Pr

(4)

where, (W/R) is the processing gain, Pr is the received signal
strength, I
intra
is the sum of the received signal powers of other
transmissions within the same cell, I
inter
is the sum of the received
signal powers from the other cells, and N
thermal
is the thermal noise
power.

5.4  Power Control Model
Power control is the crucial part in the system since it is necessary
to minimise the interference in the system by minimising the level
of transmitted power to the optimum level, which means just
enough to maintain the link quality. Power control in UMTS
consists of three main functions: (i) open-loop power control, (ii)
inner-loop power control, and (iii) outer-loop power control [14].
As the simulation focuses on the uplink-limited capacity, power
control for the uplink is applied. In this work, the first two types are
applied in

the simulation since they have the major effect on the
simulation result. Without outer-loop power control, the target SIR
has to be fixed; here, it is assumed to be 6 dB and the threshold is 4
dB. [10] The power control step is assumed to be 1 dB at each
power control cycle. [15][16]
5.4.1  Open-Loop Power Control
Open-loop power control is applied when new connection requests
arrive in the system as initial step of the admission process (section
4). The total interference at the base station is calculated as it is the
parameter that User Equipment (UE) needs to use in the estimation
of its initial transmit power. According to the parameter and the
target SIR, UE estimates the transmit power and uses it as an initial
transmit power.
5.4.2  Inner-Loop Power Control
This is done periodically to allow the transmitted power of each
connection to be kept as low as possible, yet maintain the target
SIR. Firstly, the base station calculates the received SIR from the
UE. If the SIR is less than the target SIR
,
the TPC (Transmit Power
Control) command "up" is sent to the UE which increases the

transmitted power by one step. If the SIR is more than the target
SIR+1, the TPC command "down" is sent to the UE which
decreases the transmitted power by one step. Otherwise, the UE
maintains the same transmitted power. After the power control
cycle has been performed, the new SIR for each mobile can be
calculated. Any mobile that has an SIR less than the threshold will
not be dropped immediately; instead the system will try to
reallocate that mobile to another base station nearby that still has
available bandwidth and can provide the link quality. If it is
possible, the mobile will be handed over to the next base station,
otherwise the mobile will be dropped. The transmitted power has a
maximum of 21dBm; if the calculated transmit power is more than
the maximum power, the maximum transmitted power will be
applied.
In this simulation, the inner-loop power control is performed every
10ms. Experiments have been done by varying the power control
time step and the results show that the blocking rate becomes
erratic as the timing gets too high. From the experiment, the time
step of 10ms has been chosen as it is the highest value that gives
consistent results. From the simulation point of view, it is
preferable to use the highest time as this reduces the length of the
simulation.
The power control is essentially that used in 3G without including
outer-loop power control.
5.5  Verification and Validation
One of the most important aspects in developing the simulation
model is its credibility; therefore the validation and verification of
any simulation model are essential. The simulation model was
validated by comparing the result with the relevant result from [8]: 
this is discussed in [1]
.
0
MA
(M-1)A
(M-2)A
A
2A


2


M

M

)
1
(
M

2

)
1
(
M
255
5.6  CBR Model
According to [17], there are several proposed schemes of
organizational structure and retrieval algorithms for CBR. In this
work, the hierarchical memory with parallel search is used as it
provides an efficient retrieval that is less time consuming, as the
matching and retrieving happen in one step, which also give less
complexity.
The monitoring process of the system performed every 10 seconds.
This means the monitoring parameters will be collected for 10
seconds and sent to the local planning layer of an agent where the
CBR model is located as shown in figure 1. The parameters will
then be compared with the SLA requirements and any deviation
from the SLA  can be reported. The CBR model will then be used
to find the best solution for the situation. Base on the process model
in figure 1, a solution will be proposed, or where the  best matched
case cannot be found or the evaluating process fails, a calculation
might be used instead in order to find the solution according to
certain rules.
As the parallel search has been chosen for the CBR model, the
whole library will be searched for each characterizing index in one
step. If the new case is to be retained in the library, the library
indexes have to be re-sorted according to the priority of the
characterizing index of the new case.
5.7  Monitoring and case matching process
As explained above, the monitoring process is done every 10
seconds. The call blocking, call dropping and the accumulative
value of blocking rate are calculated and by comparing them with
the SLA requirements, the error can be detected. If the error being
reported is significant, the CBR model will be called.
There are seven characterising indexes used to describe the case at
the moment. Currently, they are obtained by matching the actual
monitoring factors into a suitable range where the value belongs.
Therefore, the characterising indexes will be in form of small
integer numbers. The seven monitoring factors are as follows-:
·  Total throughput for the whole system 
·  Offered traffic for the whole system 
·  Offered traffic for silver customer for the whole system 
·  Offered traffic for gold customer for the whole system 
·  Cell identity where offered traffic exceeds limit 
·  Accumulative blocking rate for silver class 
·  Accumulative blocking rate for gold class
In case that there is not an exact match, there needs be a way to
identify whether the closest match is acceptable for the situation.
However, in the current model, only the best match will be chosen.
In future work, the acceptable level for each case will be
determined by the distance to the seven-dimensional coordinates
defining the individual point of the case. If it is within the tolerable
range, the case will be used.
TRAFFIC PATTERN RECOGNITION AND NUMERICAL RESULTS
The previous work [1] was done to support the basic idea that the
reactive layer of the agent system can be controlled by the planning
layer in order to ensure system compliance with the SLA. Here, the
SLA assumptions made for the maximum acceptable level of call
blocking rate.
-  Maximum acceptable call blocking rate for gold : 0.03
-  Maximum acceptable call blocking rate for silver : 0.05
The gold customer pays the highest rate for the least elasticity of
service level. These rates can either be instantaneous values or
measured over a period of time; naturally the numerical limits
would be different.
In [1], the random overload situation has been tested with the traffic
load being increased after the system reached stability. The call
dropping rate is acceptable before high traffic load was applied, but
after changing the load, the call dropping rate increases, then
slowly declines to about the same level as before, because of the
implementation of ideal assignment and admission control. On the
other hand, the call blocking rate increases as a greater number of
mobiles attempt to get into the system and the system tries not to
drop any existing connection, so more will be blocked. The call
buffering time for all classes of customer and all types of service
has been set to zero to give immediate accept or reject decisions.
Figure 5 shows the comparison between the result from the
conventional system that does not chance the policy with the
dashed lines and the result of policy chance as the solid lines.
Without the SLA based control, the call blocking rate for all
customer classes raises as the traffic load increases.
For the SLA based control, the implementation here uses a buffer
mechanism so the a call request that cannot be served immediately
is held for a short time in case resources become available. The
buffering time is configurable. From solid lines at the point when
the level of call blocking rate for gold customer reaches the
maximum level, policy 2 is applied which allocates a short
buffering time to call requests from gold and silver customers, with
that for bronze customers still being set to zero. The result shows
that the call blocking rate of gold and silver customers stabilises,
but does not go below the limit set for gold. After waiting for a
short period (here 2 minutes) to ensure the trend is stable, a further
change in policy is applied; this gives longer buffering time for
gold customers and slightly longer buffering time for silver
customers, so increasing still further the probability of gold and
silver customers (especially gold) being accepted at the expense of
bronze.









Figure 5  Comparison between the result from the conventional
system and SLA based control system
Silver maximum level
Gold maximum level
Mean interarrival 100ms
Mean interarrival 25 ms.
Policy 1
Policy 2
Policy 3
Bronze
Silver
Gold
With SLA control 
Without SLA control
Gold
Bronze
Silver
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
18000
90000
2E+05
2E+05
3E+05
4E+05
5E+05
5E+05
6E+05
Simulation time (ms.)
Rate of call blocking over total avtice call
256
A simple case library has been generated partly from this previous
work and the knowledge from the work under current study. By
using the simulation model mentioned before, a few traffic patterns
can be implemented to test the system performance.
The two main environments being tested here are the random
overload situation and the hot spot situation. As the system detects
the congestion, the CBR model is called to analyse the situation and
the simulation results will be divided in two sections.
6.1  Random overload case
For this case, the simulation repeated the previous work explained
before by adding the CBR model and also use the simulation model
illustrated in section 5. (In previous work [1] the less detailed
simulation model has been used.)
Figure 6 shows the simulation results of the call blocking across the
simulation time as the traffic load increases in a conventional
system that does not change policy. The call buffering time for all
classes of customers and all types of services has been set to zero to
give immediate accept or reject decisions.











Figure 6  The simulation result from conventional system for
the random overload situation
Figure 7, 8 and 9 show the effect of using the CBR approach to
identify the current traffic pattern and manage the reactive layer
policies accordingly.
It might be thought that these results are simply the normal result of
applying priorities, but the technique is more powerful. In many
SLAs, it is not short-term violations that are important: an SLA
might specify for instance that the blocking rate must not exceed a
certain value during a day or a month.
The new policy has been applied to the reactive layer as soon as the
system recognises congestion, in this example using the
accumulative error rate over a period of 10s.
The implementation here again uses a buffer mechanism to give
short buffering time to call request that cannot be served
immediately, especially for the higher priority customer. The
buffering time is configurable. It can be seen from the result that
CBR keeps the call blocking rate for gold and/or silver customers
within the SLA bounds, according to the congestion pattern.
In figure 7, the traffic reaches overload when the accumulative call
blocking rate for gold exceeds the limit, at that point silver is still in
an acceptable range. In this case the chosen policy gives the highest
buffering time to gold and lower value for silver with that for
bronze still at zero.










Figure 7  Simulation results showing the effect of SLA-based
control by CBR approach for the first random overload case
It can be seen that the system detects the overload situation at the
point where the traffic load increases and generates the appropriate
policy. As the new policy gives priority to gold, the call blocking
for gold customer is maintained within an acceptable range at the
expense of both silver and bronze.
Figure 8 shows the result from the second case, where the traffic is
overloaded with the accumulative call blocking rate for gold and
silver exceeding the maximum value. In this case, both silver and
gold QoS need to be handled. By giving highest buffering time to
silver and slightly lower for gold, the blocking for both can be kept
within the range. As the buffer in this implementation uses the
priority arrangement, gold customers are always in the top of the
queue, so, in order to also give priority to silver customers, their
buffering time has to be higher.








Figure 8  Simulation results showing the effect of SLA-based
control by CBR approach for the second random
overload case
Silver
Gold maximum level 
Silver maximum level
Normal traffic
Overload traffic
Gold
Bronze
Silver
Gold maximum level
Silver maximum level
Normal traffic
Overload traffic
Gold
Bronze
Silver
Gold maximum level
Silver maximum level
Normal traffic
Overload traffic
Gold
Bronze
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
5
35
65
95 125 155 185 215 245 275 305 335 365 395
Simulation time (s.)
Call blocking rate
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
5
35
65 95 125 155 185 215 245 275 305 335 365 395
Simulation time (s.)
Call blocking rate
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
5
35
65
95 125 155 185 215 245 275 305 335 365 395
Simulation time (s.)
Call blocking rate
257
In Figure 9 the situation is that the long-term value for gold
customers has been met, but that for silver is at the limit. When
congestion occurs then, silver customers have to be given priority
in order that their long-term blocking is not exceeded, but gold
customers can be allowed to have worse service since there is still
"slack" in their SLA.








Figure 9  Simulation results showing the effect of SLA-based
control by CBR approach for the
last random overload case
The SLA monitoring here is looking at the long-term blocking, has 
detected that silver needs priority and has applied that priority.
These results show the flexibility of the control system which
assigns different policies to different scenarios and also shows that
the highest priority can also be a sacrifice in order to maintain the
customer who normally has the overall long-term values.
In fact any SLA that can be evaluated numerically can be used as 
the basis for controlling the policy: the system is that flexible.
6.2  Hot spot case
With hot spots, the monitoring process is able to identify the
congestion from the individual blocking and dropping parameters
of each cell. CBR model will then match the pattern with the cases
in the library. The proposed mechanism here can be seen in figure
10.
The bronze and silver users near the boundary will be transferred to
the neighbouring cells that have normal traffic: effectively then by
controlling the cell size in a more comprehensive manner than
simple cell breathing from power control. By doing this, some of
the capacity will be released for the hot spot cell in order to
maintain the users nearer to the centre and high priority users.













Figure 10  Hot spot situation and the proposed solution

In the initial work for this hot spot case, the transferring process or
handover will be done every 10s, which is the frequency of the
monitoring process. An example of results from the initial work in
this case are shown in figure 11 and 12.
In figure 11, after the traffic load has increased in the hot spot cell,
the call blocking rate for the hot spot call rise up while the other
cells still have low blocking rate as the traffic was controlled within
normal level.






Figure 11  Result from the conventional system for the hot
spot situation




Gold 
Silver 
Bronze
Silver
Gold maximum level 
Silver maximum level
Normal traffic
Overload traffic
Gold
Bronze
Silver
Gold maximum level 
Silver maximum level
Normal traffic
Overload traffic
Gold
Bronze
Hot spot cell 
Normal traffic cell

0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
5
35 65
95 125 155 185 215 245 275 305 335 365 395
Simulation model (s.)
Call blocking rat
e
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
5
35 65 95 125 155 185 215 245 275 305 335 365 395
Simulation Time (s.)
Call block rate
258
Figure 12 shows the result of using the CBR model which 
instructs the system to perform the handover for bronze and silver 
users near boundary to the neighbouring cells every 10s. The 
blocking rate for the hot spot cell still increases after the traffic 
load has increased but by comparing with the result in figure 11, 
the call blocking rate  is lower. Further work is being done on 
evaluating more complex scenarios.

Figure 12  Result from SLA based control system with CBR
model for the hot spot situation

CONCLUSIONS
This paper has introduced the concept of combining CBR with an 
intelligent agent layered architecture to manage SLAs in W-CDMA
networks. The simulation results show that the CBR 
system has been able to detect congestion occurring and then 
apply the appropriate policy to manage the behaviour of the CAC 
to block those customers who, at that time, are perceived as less 
important to the operator.
The scenarios illustrated are fairly simple but further work is 
evaluating the approach over a much more complex range of 
situations.
REFERENCES
[1]
Chantaraskul, S. and Cuthbert, L.G. SLA Control for 
Congestion Management in 3G Networks, in  Proceeding of 
the IASTED International Conference on Wireless and 
Optical Communications (WOC2003), Banff, Alberta, 
Canada, 2003, pp. 447-452.
[2]
Chantaraskul, S. and Cuthbert, L.G. Introducing Case-Based 
Reasoning in SLA Control for Congestion Management in 
3G Networks, in  Proceeding of the

IEEE Wireless
Communications and Networking Conference 2004 (IEEE 
WCNC2004), Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 2004.
[3]
Cuthbert, L.G., Ryan, D., Tokarchuk, L., Bigham, J., 
Bodanese, E. Using intelligent agents to manage resource in 
3G Networks, Journal of IBTE, vol. 2 part 4, Oct.-Dec. 2001, 
pp. 1-6.
[4]
Admodt A. and Plaza E., Case-Based Reasoning: 
Foundational Issues, Methodological Variations, and System, 
AI Communications, The European Journal of Artificial 
Intelligence, vol. 7:1, pp. 39-59. 1994.
[5]
Caulier, P. and Houriez, B. A Case-Based Reasoning 
Approach in Network Traffic Control, in  Proceeding of the 
IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and 
Cybernetics, 1995.  Intelligent Systems for the 21st Century, 
Volume 2, 1995, pp. 1430-1435.
[6]
Hassanein, H., Al-Monayyes, A. and Al-Zubi,M. Improving 
Call Admission Control in ATM Networks Using Case-Based 
Reasoning, in Proceeding of the IEEE International 
Conference on Performance, Computing, and 
Communications, 2001, pp. 120-127.
[7]
Huang, C. Y.  and Yates, R. D. Call Admission in Power 
Controlled CDMA Systems, in Proceeding of the IEEE 
Vehicular Technology Conference, 1996, pp.227-231.
[8]
Capone, A., Redana S. Call Admission Control Techniques 
for UMTS, in Proceeding of the IEEE Vehicular Technology 
Conference, 2001, pp.925-929.
[9]
Liu, Z.  and Zarki, M. E. SIR Based Call Admission Control 
for DS-CDMA Cellular System, IEEE Journal on Selected 
Areas in Communications, vol. 12, issue 4, May 1994, pp. 
638-644.
[10]
Kuri, J. and Mermelstein, P. Call Admission on the Uplink of 
a CDMA System based on Total Received Power, in 
Proceeding of the IEEE International Conference on 
Communications, vol. 3, 1999, pp. 1431-1436.
[11]
So, J.W. and Cho, D.H. Access Control of Data in Integrated 
Voice/Data/Video CDMA Systems, in Proceeding of the VTC 
Spring 2002, IEEE 55
th
vol. 3, 2002, p.1512-1516.
[12]
Angelou, E.S.,  Koutsokeras, N.Th, Kanatas, A.G.  and 
Constantinou, Ph. SIR-Based Uplink Terrestrial Call 
Admission Control Scheme with Handoff for Mixed Traffic 
W-CDMA Networks , in Proceeding of the 4
th
International
Workshop on Mobile and Wireless Communications Network, 
2002, pp. 83-87, 2002.
[13]
Radio Frequency (RF) system scenarios, 3GPP TR 253942, 
Avialable:  htpp://www.sgpp.org
[14]
Laiho, J., Wacker, A. and Novosad, T. Radio Network 
Planning and Optimisation for UMTS, John Wiley & Sons, 
Ltd., 2002.
[15]
Baker, M.P.J., Moulsley, T.J. Power Control in UMTS 
Release '99, 3G Mobile Communication Technologies, 2000. 
First International Conference on (IEE Conf. Publ. 
No.471),27-29, March 2000, pp.36­40
.

[16]
Thong, W.S., Bigham, J. Hierachical Managament of CDMA 
Network Resources, in Proceeding of the Third International 
Conference on  3G Mobile Communication Technologies, 
2002
(Conf. Publ. No. 489),
8-10 May 2002

pp. 216 ­ 220.
[17]
Kolodner, J. Case-Based Reasoning, Morgan Kaufmann 
Publishers, Inc., 1993, pp. 289-320.

Silver
Gold maximum level
Silver maximum level
Normal traffic
Overload traffic
Gold
Bronze
Hot spot cell 
Normal traffic
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
5
35 65
95 125 155 185 215 245 275 305 335 365 395
Simulation Time (s.)
Call block rate
259

