Catenaccio: Interactive Information Retrieval System through Drawing
ABSTRACT
The Catenaccio system integrates information retrieval with 
sketch manipulations. The system is designed especially for pen-based
computing and allows users to retrieve information by 
simple pen manipulations such as drawing a picture. When a user 
draws a circle and writes a keyword, information nodes related to 
the keyword are collected automatically inside the circle. In 
addition, the user can create a Venn diagram by repeatedly 
drawing circles and keywords to form more complex queries. 
Thus, the user can retrieve information both interactively and 
visually without complex manipulations. Moreover, the sketch 
interaction is so simple that it is possible to combine it with other 
types of data such as images and real-world information for 
information retrieval. In this paper, we describe our Catenaccio 
system and how it can be effectively applied.
CR Categories: I.3.6 [Computer Graphics]: Methodology and 
Techniques ­ Interaction Techniques; I.3.4 [Computer Graphics]: 
Graphics Utilities ­ Software support
INTRODUCTION
Pen-based computers, such as personal digital assistants (PDA) 
and tablet PCs, have been developed. These computers are 
characterized by simple sketch interfaces similar to drawing a 
picture on paper in the real world. This drawing manipulation is 
not especially useful for communicating details, but is effective 
for general use. It is especially useful for creative activities, so 
there have been a number of research reports on improving sketch 
manipulation [1, 2, 3].
In addition, some game devices (e.g., Nintendo DS [4]) support 
such kinds of interactions and provide many types of game 
content. In these systems, a user can use the entire system window 
as a workspace and create 3D CG from 2D drawings. However, as 
the original applications may not support information retrieval, 
the user has to use conventional retrieval applications along with 
pen-based input styles. 
Considerable research has been done to support the use of 
information visualization for retrieving information [5]. Technical 
visualization methods such as zooming and scaling can be used to 
effectively display huge amounts of data [6, 7, 8]. However, 
existing visualization systems focus on mouse manipulation (e.g., 
click and drag), so they are not effectively designed for pen-based 
interactions such as a drawing. 
The most popular method of retrieving information is no doubt 
keyword searching. Search engines via the Web (e.g., Google and 
Yahoo) have been

generally used for keyword searching [12, 13],
and people feel that they cannot live without such search engines. 
Generally, keyword searching requires users to input one or more 
keywords. In these systems, users can retrieve information related 
to the keywords with Boolean operations (e.g., AND, OR and 
NOT). However, the systems are based on conventional input 
methods. Users of pen-based computers have to write a query into 
a fixed dialog box with a stylus or pen. 
Therefore, we have been developing an information retrieval 
system based on simple sketch manipulations. Our goal is to 
devise an effective and simple information retrieval system that 
works on pen-based computers, so we integrated a keyword 
searching that is one of the most usual methods with sketch 
manipulation that is one of the simple interactions. In our system, 
users retrieve information by drawing a Venn diagram instead of 
inputting keywords to a dialog box. Because the Venn diagram 
can be used to display Boolean operations (e.g., AND, OR, and 
NOT) visually and create some relationships at the same time, 
users can recognize the relationships at a glance. Moreover, the 
system allows users to use other types of data as elements in a 
Venn diagram (Fig. 1).

In this paper, we describe our Catenaccio system that integrates 
information retrieval with sketch manipulations, and explain how 
it can be effectively applied for information retrieval.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
AVI '06, May 23­26, 2006, Venezia, Italy. 
Copyright 2006 ACM 1-59593-353-0/06/0005...$5.00.

79


Figure 1: Venn diagram: Venn diagram can be used to display 
Boolean operations and some relationships at the same time 
(top). The user can create an original Venn diagram (bottom).

Figure 2. Basic manipulation: A user of the Catenaccio system 
draws a circle and writes a keyword inside that circle. 
Information nodes related to the keyword are then collected 
within the circled area.

RELATED WORK
A wide variety of information visualization systems are used for 
information retrieval [5]. Treating information as visualized nodes 
(e.g., images and simple shapes) allows users to interact with the 
information space visually. Moreover, several techniques (e.g., 
scaling, zooming, focus and context) are used to display a huge 
amount of information more effectively [6, 7, 8, 19]. Especially, 
spring model [11] provides useful ways to recognize the 
relationships between nodes. In these systems, related nodes move 
when the user clicks and drags a node. That is, node positions are 
dynamically changed through the user manipulations, so users 
retrieve information interactively. InfoCrystal [9] is also a visual 
tool focused on information retrieval. The system uses Venn 
diagrams to treat huge amounts of information effectively. 
However, conventional systems are designed for mouse 
interactions (e.g., click and drag) and their layouts are predefined, 
so they are not suitable for Pen-based computing, especially 
drawing or writing by hand. 
There are also several sketch interfaces focusing on pen-based 
computing [1, 2, 3]. Most of them enhance drawing manipulations 
and focus on 3D creations performed with 2D manipulation. 
Characteristically, the manipulations required for these systems 
are simple and are similar to drawing a stroke on a piece of paper 
with a pen. Sketch [1] users can draw 3D curves by performing 
2D manipulations. This system calculates a 3D curve by 
combining a 2D stroke and a shadow stroke. Users of Harold [2] 
and Tolba [3] can create flat models in a 3D space by using 
sketch-based manipulation, effectively creating a 2.5D scene in a 
3D space.

Figure 3. Drawing a Venn diagram: By repeatedly drawing 
circles and keywords, users create Venn diagrams, and can 
then retrieve information by forming complex queries. 
Information nodes related with both "CG" and "3D" are 
collected.

SYSTEM OVERVIEW
The Catenaccio system is focused on pen-based computing and 
provides an interactive and visual information retrieval 
environment of using drawing manipulations.
3.1
Drawing Circles and Writing Keywords

A user of the Catenaccio system draws a circle and writes a 
keyword inside that circle. The system automatically recognizes 
both the circle area and the keyword. Information nodes related to 
the keyword are then collected within the circled area. By making 
a continuous series of simple drawings, the user can create a Venn 
diagram to form a more complex query. Since the entire window 
is both a search area and a drawing canvas, the user can use the 
workspace freely. 
Since all the manipulations required for information retrieval are 
based on sketch manipulations, users can design an original Venn 
diagram related their interests. Thus, users can freely exploit the 
whole application window as both an input and a search area and 
retrieve information without complex GUIs. 
The circle provides an area where information nodes related to the 
keyword will be collected, and the keyword provides a query to 
search for related information nodes from a database. By 
continuing to use simple drawings, users can form more complex 
queries. The related information nodes are moved with a force 
that depends on the distance between the node position and the 
center of the circle (Fig. 2). 
Figure 3 shows an example of creating a Venn diagram by 
continuing to draw circles and keywords. In the example, when a 
user retrieves information that has two keywords "CG" and "3D", 
the user first draws a circle and writes "CG" (Fig. 3 (1)), and then 
draws another circle and writes "3D" (Fig. 3 (2)). Information 
nodes related to both keywords appear in the shared area of the 
Venn diagram (Fig. 3 (3 and 4)). Moreover, in the Venn diagram, 
the user can view four areas at a glance (Fig. 3 (3)).
80

Figure 4: Venn diagram of a drawing and an image, and Venn 
diagram of a drawing and an image that contains character 
information.

Figure 5: Combination with real-world information: 
Capturing real-world information as a picture (1, 2) and 
drawing a circle around the keyword brings up related 
information nodes (3, 4).
3.2  Combination with Other Types of Data
Users can now easily take pictures using digital cameras and cell 
phones that contain CCD cameras. As a result, they may have a 
huge amount of original image data in their computers. These data 
include some information such as name, time, or place, so we 
considered using them for information retrieval.
We have developed prototype applications to explore the potential 
of Catenaccio. A Venn diagram is basically constructed by 
combining keywords and areas, so it is possible to combine that 
diagram with other types of data such as images and real-world 
information. Images contain name, time, or place information, and 
that information becomes a good trigger for retrieving other 
information and it can be used for queries. In addition, the image 
data has a rectangular shape that is useful for setting an area by 
controlling its position and size.
The example in Figure 4 shows how users can use images to 
create Venn diagrams by combining drawings with image data. In 
the example, a file named "Mr. Tobita" becomes a query for the 
Venn diagram, so information related to "VR" AND "Mr. 
Tobita" is collected. In this case, even if users have forgotten 
someone's name, they can still retrieve related information 
through image contents. 
Figure 5 shows an example a Venn diagram with real-world 
information. Generally, using captured data for an interaction 
trigger is a common technique in AR systems [20]. We also use it 
for elements of Venn diagrams. Users first capture real-world 
information through digital cameras attached to their computers 
(Fig. 5 (1, 2)), and then draw circles around keywords on the 
captured data and another circle to collect information nodes (Fig. 
5 (3)). As the system recognizes the keyword inside the first circle, 
related information nodes appear inside the second curve (Fig. 5 
(4)).

Figure 6: Recognition of user drawings: The system labels the 
user drawing area (1, 2). The system recognizes written 
keywords by using an OCR library (3) 
Previously, we have proposed a similar information retrieval 
system [10]. That system provides natural interactions, however, 
it completely depends on real-world objects. However, 
Catenaccio provides not only real-world information, but also 
drawing manipulations. Thus, the user can retrieve information 
even if there are not enough real-world objects.

IMPLEMENTATION
The entire workspace is bitmapped as in conventional 2D paint 
systems, and user drawing manipulations are reflected in the 
bitmap. The system supports two types of drawing, writing 
keywords and area drawings. The keyword writing is displayed as 
green, and the area drawing is displayed as blue. To set an area, 
the system labels the inside of a green area and knows the size 
and position of the area (Fig. 6 (1)). Then, the system divides the 
area into four layers for node animations (Fig. 6(2)). For keyword 
writing, the system sends the result to an OCR library to search 
for its meaning (Fig. 6 (3)). 
Catenaccio is a prototype system now, and the relationship 
between keywords and information nodes are predefined in a 
temporary database. The database contains three types of data: 
node names, keywords, and relationship levels. After the image 
recognition processes, nodes related to the keyword are selected 
and start moving until they are in the area appropriate to their 
relationship. The force is calculated by spring model [11]. For 
example, the node with the strongest relationship with the 
keyword receives a force that takes it to the deepest area.

DISSCUSSION
We have had some opportunities to demonstrate our system. Here, 
we discuss user interactions with Catenaccio based on comments 
made by visitors to our demonstrations. Also we consider the 
limitations of the system and our plans for future work.
From our demonstrations, the visitors quickly understood the 
concepts of our system that integrates information retrieval with
81
drawing manipulations. Using Venn diagrams makes recognizing 
the relationships between information nodes and keywords easy. 
Most visitors could create simple Venn diagrams and set related 
nodes into the diagrams after watching a simple demonstration. 
We observed that some users drew interesting Venn diagrams that 
resembled pictures. The system facilitates creative activities, so 
we expect users will be able to create more original, and 
increasingly effective drawings for information retrieval. 
Especially, we received good reactions from users regarding the 
combination of drawing and an image to create a Venn diagram. 
By exploiting such combinations, the system augments keyword 
searching, and it is different from conventional search engines [12, 
13]. Moreover, combining keywords and user-drawn pictures to 
create Venn diagrams is possible.
Our system focuses on information retrieval for pen-based input. 
However, information retrieval using Venn diagrams is quite 
rough. We plan to combine our system with other types of sketch-based
systems such as VelvetPath [16] to support more detailed 
interaction. With such a combination, users can use Catenaccio 
for general retrieval of information and then use VelvetPath to 
examine the information in more detail. In this case, all the 
manipulations would still be based on drawing or handwriting, so 
a user can handle a large amount of data in a natural way. 
Drawing manipulation is also useful for finger gestures.
Many AR systems support the use of finger gestures as an input 
method [17, 18]. As the system recognizes user finger gestures, 
users can create Venn diagrams by manipulating real-world 
objects, drawing circles, and writing keywords.
CONCLUSION
We described the Catenaccio system that is focused on Pen-based 
computing and allows users to retrieve information by drawing 
Venn diagrams. The system recognizes user writing and drawings 
(keywords and circles) and places information related to the 
keywords inside the circles. Using this input, the system provides 
an interactive and visual information retrieval method. We 
described some examples of retrieving information through 
simple drawings. We also provided several examples of unique 
Venn diagrams created by combining drawings with images and 
real-world information.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Tetsuji Takada and Sinji Daigo for the visible and 
useful suggestions on this work.

REFERENCES
[1]
R. C. Zeleznik, K. P. Herndon, and J. F. Hughes. An 
Interface for Sketching 3D Curves. In Proceedings of 
ACM SIGGRAPH '96, pp. 163-170, 1996.
[2]
J. M. Cohen, J. F. Hughes, and R. C. Zeleznik. Harold: 
A World Made of Drawings. In Proceedings of 
NPAR2000 (Symposium on Non-Photorealistic 
Animation and Rendering), pp. 83-90, 2000.
[3]
O. Tolba, J. Doresey, and L. McMillan. Sketching with 
Projective 2D Strokes. In Proceedings of ACM 
UIST '99, pp. 149-157, 1999.
[4]
Nintendo DS: http://www.nintendo.co.jp/ds/
[5]
S. K. Card, J. D. MacKinlay, and B. Shneiderman. 
Readings in Information Visualization: Using Vision 
to Think. Morgan Kaufmann, 1999.
[6]
H. Koike. Fractal views: a fractal-based method for 
controlling information display. In Proceedings of 
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 13, 
No. 3, pp. 305-323, July 1995.
[7]
G. W. Furnas. Generalized fisheye views. In 
Proceedings of the ACM Transactions on Computer-Human
Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 126-160, 1994.
[8]
B. B. Bederson, J. D. Hollan, K. Perlin, J. Meyer, D. 
Bacon, and G. Furnas. Pad++: A Zoomable Graphical 
Sketchpad for Exploring Alternate Interface Physics. 
Journal of Visual Languages and Computing, Vol. 7, 
No. 1, pp. 3-31, 1996.
[9]
A. Spoerri. Visual tools for information retrieval. In 
Proceedings of VL'93, pp. 160-168, 1993.

[10]
H. Koike, Y. Sato, Y. Kobayashi, H. Tobita and M. 
Kobayashi. Interactive Textbook and Interactive Venn 
Diagram. In Proceedings of ACM CHI2000, pp. 121-128
, 2000.
[11]
R. Davidson and D. Harel. Drawing Graphics Nicely 
Using Simulated Annealing. In Proceedings of ACM 
Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 15, No. 4, pp. 301-331, 
1996.
[12]
Google: http://www.google.com
[13]
Yahoo: http://www.yahoo.com
[14]
T. Calishain and R. Dornfest. GoogleHack:
100
Industrial-Strength Tips & Tricks
. O'RELLY, 2003.
[15]
P. Bausch. AmazonHack: 100 Industrial-Strength Tips 
& Tools. O'RELLY, 2003.
[16]
H. Tobita. VelvetPath: Layout Design System with 
Sketch and Paint Manipulations, In Proceedings of 
EUROGRAPHICS2003 Short Presentations, pp. 137-144
, 2003.
[17]
J. Rekimoto. SmartSkin: An Infrastructure for 
Freehand Manipulation on Interactive Surfaces, In 
Proceedings of ACM CHI2002, 113-120, 2002.

[18] X. Chen, H. Koike, Y. Nakanishi, K. Oka, and Y. Sato. Two-handed
drawing on augmented desk system, In Proceedings 
of AVI 2002, 2002.
[19] E. Orimo and H. Koike. ZASH: A browsing system for
multi-dimensional data. In Proceedings of IEEE VL '99, pp. 
266-286, 1999.
[20] J. Rekimoto and K. Nagao. The world through the computer:
Computer augmented interaction with real world 
environments. In Proceedings of ACM UIST'95, pp. 29-36, 
1995.

82
