A Case Study on How to Manage the Theft of Information
ABSTRACT
This paper shows the importance that management plays in the 
protection of information and in the planning to handle a security 
breach when a theft of information happens.  Recent thefts of 
information that have hit major companies have caused concern.   
These thefts were caused by companies' inability to determine 
risks associated with the protection of their data and these 
companies lack of planning to properly manage a security breach 
when it occurs.  It is becoming necessary, if not mandatory, for 
organizations to perform ongoing risk analysis to protect their 
systems.  Organizations need to realize that the theft of 
information is a management issue as well as a technology one, 
and that these recent security breaches were mainly caused by 
business decisions by management and not a lack of technology.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
C.2.0  [Computer-Communication Networks] General ­ 
Security and protection.
K.3.2  [Computers And Education] ­ Computer and Information 
Science Education ­ Curriculum, Information systems education.
K.4.1, .2, & .4 [Computers and Society] - .1 Public Policy Issues 
­ Abuse and crime involving computers, Computer-related health 
issues, Ethics, Intellectual property right, Privacy.  .2 Social 
Issues ­ Abuse and crime involving computers.  .4  Electronic 
Commerce ­ Security.
K.6.5 [Management of Computing and Information Systems] 
­ Security and Protection ­ Authentication, Invasive software, 
unauthorized access.

General Terms
Management, Security, Human Factors, Standardization, Legal 
Aspects.

INTRODUCTION
After counter-terrorism and counter-intelligence, cyber crime is 
the third highest priority for the U.S. Federal Bureau [4].  With 
the rise of the theft of information and the lure of big profits for 
this stolen information, it is necessary for information systems to 
have the ability to protect this valuable asset.  It is estimated that a 
credit card number unsupported by any other documentation is 
worth $10, and a credit history report retails for $60 [2].  Recent 
breaches of information systems that have lead to thefts of 
information have shown that management practices and not 
technology was part of the issue and in some cases the primary 
cause of the theft of the information.  With each of these thefts, 
there is a third party committing a crime, but in each case, risk 
analysis could have been used to avoid or to help mitigate the 
theft.  It is becoming a necessity that companies examine their 
business practices and company policies to avoid risks associated 
with information stealing.  The solution to information stealing 
does not reside in technology alone but also requires an 
understanding by management of the business and the risks 
associated with it.  This paper examines the theft of information 
from different companies in order to explain the short coming of 
management practices that lead to the theft.  .

CASE STUDIES
In May of 2005, Citigroup lost computer tapes that were being 
sent to the credit bureau via UPS that included Social Security 
numbers and payment history information for 3.9 million 
customers.  After this event, this New York based company has 
decided that it will start sending its data to the credit bureau 
electronically using encryption [8].
Citigroup should have learned a lesson from Time Warner who 
lost a shipment of backup tapes that contained personal 
information of 600,000 employees that was being sent to an 
offsite data storage company in March of 2005 [9].  But the 
question remains, why was Citigroup sending sensitive 
information unsecured?   Why did they not encrypt the data in the 
first place, and why did they realize that these tapes could get lost 
or stolen as evident to what happened with Time Warner?  The 
answer is because they did not correctly identify the risk.  
Citigroup believed that UPS was a secure method for sending this 
information and that the data would be difficult to retrieve off the 
tapes because of the hardware needed to read the tapes.  Citigroup 
needed to evaluate this risk of properly protecting confidential 
information while in transmission.  Now, Citigroup has the issue 
of dealing with the negative public associated with this event, and 
the loss of any potential customers/revenue it will lose because of
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Information Security Curriculum Development (InfoSecCD)

Conference '05, September 23-24, 2005, Kennesaw, GA, USA. 
Copyright 2005 ACM 1-59593-261-5/05/0009...$5.00.

135
it.  This issue would have been avoided if Citigroup would have 
properly identified this risk and taken the steps to protect this 
information.  If the tapes were lost and the data was encrypted, 
then this story would have never happened.
2.2

Case II: ChoicePoint
Choicepoint has made more than 50 acquisitions since 1997 to 
make it one of the largest collections of personal data in the 
United States.  Choicepoint sells data "to clients doing 
background checks on job and loan applicants and conducting 
criminal investigations" [10].   On February 16, 2005, 
ChoicePoint went public to tell 145,000 people that identity 
thieves may have gained access to their personal information 
including their Social Security numbers and credit reports.  
"Authorities believe it was the work of a group of people who 
used IDs stolen from legitimate business people to set up phony 
businesses that contracted with ChoicePoint for ID checks, 
Bernknopf (ChoicePoint's spoke person) said" [5].

With ChoicePoint's security incident, there was no firewall 
hacked, or an IDS fooled.  This was a deceptive scheme that took 
advantage of security holes in the business process.

ChoicePoint's CISO, Rich Baich, stated "The mislabeling of this 
event as a hack is killing ChoicePoint.  It's such a negative 
impression that suggests we failed to provide adequate protection.  
Fraud happens everyday.  Hacks don't" [10].   ChoicePoint 
seemed to push that they were the victims of fraud, and not at 
fault.  The bottom line is that confidential information was stolen, 
and the individuals who had their information stolen do not care if 
it was hacker or if the company was a victim of fraud.  
ChoicePoint failed to identify holes in the business process to 
allow this event to happen.  Which if someone hacked into their 
system, it would have lead to the same result, the theft of 
information.  ChoicePoint needs to recognize that identifying 
risks with their business process is just as important as securing 
their information system from an external hacker.

2.3

Case III: Egghead.com
Egghead Software was a company that opened in 1984 to sell 
computer hardware and software that grew to have more than 205 
stores worldwide.  Then in 1998 the company moved its business 
to the internet as Egghead.com.
In December of 2000, Egghead.com stated that "a hacker has 
breached its computer system and may have gained access to its 
customer database" [6].  Jerry Kaplan, Egghead.com's co-chairman
, stated that there was "no evidence" to support that the 
database with the credit card numbers for its customer was stolen 
but, he also could not give confirmation that they were not stolen.  
"Egghead's inability to determine how many of it's customers 
credit cards had been compromised may mean that the company 
does not have a real-time auditing system in place, said Paul 
Robertson, senior developer for security service firm TruSecure 
Corp. `If you don't know how many credit-card numbers you lost, 
you are giving a quick, blanket, worst-case answer--and then 
finding out what happened afterwards,'  he  said."  [1].    The  way 
that Egghead.com handled its security incident showed that they 
did not have a good plan to manage the theft of information, and 
it appeared as if they made the plan to handle this situation as it 
happened.  This lack of planning and risk analysis by 
management caused Egghead.com's business to suffer 
tremendously.  Shortly thereafter this event, Egghead.com went
into bankruptcy, and on November 26, 2001, Amazon.com 
acquired Egghead.com's assets in the Bankruptcy Court [6].
It appears the inability for Egghead.com to successful determine 
with certainty the extent of information stolen caused more 
damage to the company's reputation then the actual event itself.  
If Egghead.com had a well developed incident response plan in 
place to handle this security breach and a way to handle the media 
that followed, Egghead.com may have been able to weather the 
storm and stay in business.  But all customer confidence was lost 
and Egghead.com was not able to recover.
2.4

Case IV: New Jersey Crime Ring
Bank employees for Wachovia Corporation, Bank of America 
Corporation, Commerce Bancorp Inc., and PNC Bank stole 
information on 676,000 customer accounts that are all New Jersey 
residents.  It is considered the largest banking security breach in 
history by the U.S. Department of the Treasury.  "The suspects 
pulled up the account data while working inside their banks, then 
printed out screen captures of the information or wrote it out by 
hand, Lomia (a New Jersey Police Detective) said. The data was 
then provided to a company called DRL Associates Inc., which 
had been set up as a front for the operation. DRL advertised itself 
as a deadbeat-locator service and as a collection agency, but was 
not properly licensed for those activities by the state, police said" 
[13].

With this security breach, there was no technology involved.  No 
hackers breached the information system.  This was completely 
an inside job.  The question becomes of how this could have been 
prevented?  The answer is that in some cases the theft of 
information can not be prevented.  The only the thing that 
management can do is be prepared for when it does happen.  
Because of incidents like this, it is becoming a duty of 
management to have an incident response plan in place long 
before a security breach happens.  From a risk analysis viewpoint, 
an incident like this is difficult to detect and almost impossible to 
stop before it happens.  But when it does happen and the criminals 
are caught, it becomes a necessity to punish the ones responsible 
to the full extent of the law to deter others from following suit.
2.5

Case V: LexisNexis
LexisNexis is provider of legal and business data.  In March of 
2005, LexisNexis announced that the information on 32,000 
people was stolen.  These breaches occurred at one of the 
subsidiary companies, Seisint Inc.  Seisnt Inc. was the company 
who was the provider of data to the Multistate Anti-Terrorism 
Information Exchange (MATRIX) system.  "LexisNexis, which 
acquired Seisint of Boca Raton, Florida, in September for $775 
million, expressed regret over the incident and said that it is 
notifying the individuals whose information may have been 
accessed and will provide them with credit-monitoring services" 
[12].  In this incident, hackers stole username and passwords of 
legitimate users to access the confidential information.  In a 
statement, "Kurt Sanford, president and CEO of LexisNexis 
Corporate and Federal Markets, said that the company will 
improve the user ID and password administration procedures that 
its customers use and will devote more resources to protecting 
user's privacy and reinforcing the importance of privacy" [12].  
This security breach is very similar to the incident that happened 
at ChoicePoint who is one of LexisNexis's competitors.


136
There are several policies that should have been implemented that 
could have reduced the risk of this security breach.  Since 
LexisNexis gives third parties access to its confidential 
information, there becomes a need to educate these organizations 
on certain practices to protect the data.  Where was this education, 
and was there a lack of education due to the possible effect that it 
could have on business?  Also, what was the password policy for 
its customers?  LexisNexis has not elaborated on the details of the 
security breach, but considering the statement of the CEO of 
LexisNexis after the incident, there clearly seems that there was a 
failure to detect the risk associated with their customer's 
password policy that could result in a theft of information.   
LexisNexis inability to properly assess this risk caused the 
security breach.  Through education and a secure password 
administration policy, this event could have been avoided.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
When analyzing these case studies, an important thing to ponder 
is that for every security breach reported, how many go 
unreported?    These security breaches could have been avoided 
with proper risk assessment and risk analysis, or at least the 
probability of a security breach could have been reduced greatly.  
For all security breaches, the prevention or at least the reduction 
of the probability of the security breach begins and ends with 
decisions that management makes.

In an organization, when a security breach occurs it causes a 
company to re-evaluate their policies that guide their information 
security.  With this rash of security incidents that have recently 
taken place, companies do not need to wait until a security breach 
happens to evaluate their security policies and analyze their risks.  
Companies need to have an ongoing risk analysis that is 
continually developed and re-developed.  They need policies that 
are ever changing to meet new threats and new security 
weaknesses from a both business practices and technology 
viewpoints.  Looking at the incidents that happened at 
ChoicePoint, LexisNexis, and Citigroup, these companies have 
technological solutions to protect their data from being stolen, but 
they failed at weighing equal importance the security of the data 
from a  business issue perspective.  This showed in their inability 
to properly evaluate the risk in the business practices.   In several 
of the cases, the theft of information occurred because of the 
business practices of the company, and technology was not even 
involved.

Also, companies need to learn from the mistakes of others 
because history will repeat itself if the lesson is not learned.  
There is an age old saying that is a wise person learns from their 
mistakes, but an even wiser person learns from the mistakes of 
others.  Citigroup needed this advice.  With Citigroup's loss of 
their backup tapes, they should have learned from the mistake that 
Time Warner made just months earlier, but they did not.  Security 
policies and practices need the flexibility to change, and 
management has a responsibility to make these changes when 
new threats or new weakness surface so that they can protect their 
data.
Companies and organizations need to realize the importance of 
making information security a business issue as well as a 
technological one.  With the issue that happened with 
Egghead.com, they did have security systems in place to protect 
their data from being stolen, "but it lacked the kind of coordinated
organizational response necessary to convince customers and 
shareholders that their sensitive data were actually secure."  
Egghead.com lost 25% of its stock value when their customer 
data was stolen [7].   Egghead.com was not ready for the media 
storm that followed the security breach which ultimately caused 
their collapse.   By making information security a business issue, 
as well as a technological one, companies can add strategic, 
operational, and organizational defenses to protect their data.

CONCULSIONS
As more identity thefts occur, companies that make their money 
from storing this information are going to become liable.  " `The 
ChoicePoint scandal has been a wake up call for how vulnerable 
consumers are to identity theft because of the lack of security 
standards for the largely unregulated information broker 
industry,' said Gail Hillebrand, Senior Attorney for Consumers 
Union's West Coast Office. `This bill will ensure that information 
brokers are held accountable for enforcing tough security 
practices to prevent thieves from gaining access to sensitive 
consumer data. And it gives consumers important new rights to 
examine the information maintained about them and to correct 
any errors they may find' [3].

Companies need to find the importance of protecting their data 
from both technology and business practices weaknesses.

Companies view the protection of their data from a technology 
issue, but fail to realize the importance that management plays in 
protecting their systems with the creation of policies and 
understanding the risks that face their information systems.

From a consumer standpoint, if a company is making profit from 
someone's personal information and they fail to protect this data, 
should they not give some sort of reputation?   Companies own 
and manage consumer information, and individuals have little 
power over their information that is controlled by these 
organizations.  As identity theft continues and companies fail at 
protecting their data, legislation will be passed that will force 
companies to comply with regulator standards that may force 
companies to give this reputation to individuals who have their 
identity stolen.

Today, there are only laws to protect data in certain industries.  
This includes the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act for healthcare and the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act for financial 
services.   With consumer groups voicing their opinions regarding 
the theft of information from companies, the US Congress and 
other state legislators are getting prepared to pass broader data 
privacy protection to protect consumers [11].

There are steps that companies and organizations need to take to 
protect themselves from the theft of information.  First, 
companies need to be prepared when a security breach occurs 
because a risk to an asset is never zero percent.  Organizations 
need to establish policies and risk assessments that protect their 
data from both technology risks and business practices well 
before a security breach occurs.  This is achieved by companies 
having the organizational structure that allows management to 
fully understand the business processes and technology that 
expose their information systems to threats.  Also, companies 
need the ability to change and adapt to new threats that oppose 
their information.  It is not possible to prevent all security 
breaches that lead to a theft of information, but companies will 
need to have policies and practices in place to better protect the

137
data.  Companies will need not only to weigh technology risk to 
their information, but also understand business issues that expose 
their information to theft.   It no longer matters how the 
information stolen, whether it was a hacker or a social engineer 
that committed the crime; companies need to protect their 
information from all threats and minimize their risks from all 
aspects.


REFERENCES
[1] Charny, Ben and Lemos, Robert.  December 22, 2000.
Egghead Scrambles to Guage Damage.  Retrieved 
06/19/2005 from 
http://seclists.org/lists/isn/2000/Dec/0134.html

[2] Crawford, Michael.  June 16, 2005.  Criminals Grasp the
Metrics of Information Value.  Retrieved 06/20/2005 from 
http://www.computerworld.com.au/index.php?id=550545875
&eid=-255

[3] ConsumersUnion.org.  Consumers Union applauds Nelson
(FL) bill to extend federal oversight to information brokers 
like ChoicePoint.  Retrieved 06/28/2005 from 
http://www.consumersunion.org/pub/core_financial_services
/002027.html

[4] Easen, Nick.  April 21, 2004.  Cyber Crime is Right Under
Your Nose.  Retrieved 06/25/2005 from 
http://www.cnn.com/2004/BUSINESS/04/20/go.cyber.securi
ty/index.html

[5] Gross, Grant.  February 23, 2005.  ChoicePoint's Error Sparks
Talk of ID Theft Law.  Retrieved 06/22/2005 from 
http://pcworld.com/news/article/0,aid,119790,00.asp



















[6] Liu, Bob.  December 3, 2001.  Eggheacd.com Becomes
Amazon.com Property.  Retrieved 06/22/2005 from 
http://www.internetnews.com/ec-news/article.php/932871
[7] McKinsey & Company, Inc.  June 6, 2002.  Managing
Information Security.  Retrieved 06/22/2005 from 
http://news.com.com/2009-1017-933185.html

[8]  McMillian, Robert.  June 7, 2005.  Citigroup to Encrypt Data
Sent to Credit Bureaus.  Retrieved 06/20/2005 from 
http://www.computerworld.com/hardwaretopics/hardware/st
ory/0,10801,102315,00.html

[9]  Mearian, Lucas.  May 2, 2005.  Time Warner Says Data of
600,000 Workers Lost.  Retrieved 06/21/2005 from 
http://www.computerworld.com/databasetopics/data/story/0,
10801,101500,00.html

[10] Mimoso, Michael.  April 2005.  Damage Control.  Retrieved
06/21/2005 from 
http://informationsecurity.techtarget.com/magItem/1,291266,
sid42_gci1073914,00.html

[11] Rasmussen, Michael. March 3, 2005.  ChoicePoint Security
Breach Will Lead to Increased Regulation.  Retrieved 
06/25/2005 from 
http://www.csoonline.com/analyst/report3416.html

[12] Robert, Paul.  March 9, 2005.  Hackers Grab LexisNexis Info
on 32,000 People.  Retrieved 06/24/2005 from 
http://www.pcworld.com/resource/article/0,aid,119953,pg,1,
RSS,RSS,00.asp

[13] Weiss, Todd.  May 20, 2005.  Scope of Bank Data Theft
Grows to 676,000 Customers.  Retrieved 06/24/2005 from 
http://www.computerworld.com/securitytopics/security/cybe
rcrime/story/0,10801,101903,00.html





138

