Quality-of-Service in IP Services over Bluetooth Ad-Hoc Networks
Abstract
Along with the development of multimedia and wireless networking technologies, mobile multimedia applications are playing
more important roles in information access. Quality of Service (QoS) is a critical issue in providing guaranteed service in a low bandwidth
wireless environment. To provide Bluetooth-IP services with differentiated quality requirements, a QoS-centric cascading mechanism is
proposed in this paper. This innovative mechanism, composed of intra-piconet resource allocation, inter-piconet handoff and Bluetooth-IP
access modules, is based on the Bluetooth Network Encapsulation Protocol (BNEP) operation scenario. From our simulations the handoff
connection time for a Bluetooth device is up to 11.84 s and the maximum average transmission delay is up to 4e-05 s when seven devices
join a piconet simultaneously. Increasing the queue length for the Bluetooth-IP access system will decrease the traffic loss rate by 0.02 per
1000 IP packets at the expense of a small delay performance.

Introduction
Wireless communications have evolved rapidly over the past
few years. Much attention has been given to research and
development in wireless networking and personal mobile
computing [10,17]. The number of computing and telecommunications
devices is increasing and consequently, portable
computing and communications devices like cellular phones,
personal digital assistants, tablet PCs and home appliances
are used widely. Wireless communication technologies will
offer the subscriber greater flexibility and capability than ever
before [14].
In February 1998, mobile telephony and computing leaders
­ Ericsson, Nokia, IBM, Toshiba, and Intel ­ formed a
Special Interest Group (SIG) to create a standard radio interface
named Bluetooth [13]. The main aim of Bluetooth
has been the development of a wireless replacement for cables
between electronic devices via a universal radio link in
the globally available and unlicensed 2.4 GHz Industrial Scientific
and Medical (ISM) frequency band [9]. Bluetooth
technologies have the potential to ensure that the best services
, system resources and quality are delivered and used efficiently
. However, global services will embrace all types of
networks. Therefore, bluetooth-based service networks will
interconnect with IPv4/v6 existing networks to provide wide
area network connectivity and Internet access to and between,
individuals and devices [7]. In Reference [2], the BLUEPAC
(BLUEtooth Public ACcess) concepts presented ideas for enabling
mobile Bluetooth devices to access local area networks
in public areas, such as airports, train stations and supermarkets
.
The Bluetooth specification defined how Bluetooth-enabled
devices (BT) can access IP network services using
the IETF Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP) and the Bluetooth
Network Encapsulation Protocol (BNEP) [12,19,20].
By
mapping IP addresses on the corresponding BT addresses
(BD_ADDR), common access across networks is enabled [3].
This means that devices from different networks are allowed
to discover and use one another's services without the need
for service translation or user interaction. To support communications
between all Bluetooth-based home appliances and
the existing IP world, IPv6 over Bluetooth (6overBT) technology
was proposed [8]. The 6overBT technology suggested
that no additional link layer or encapsulation protocol headers
be used. However, the development of 6overBT technology
is still in progress. The BNEP protocol was referred to as the
key technology in our research.
What with the development of applications and wireless
networking technologies, mobile multimedia applications are
playing more important roles in information access [21].
To provide responsive multimedia services (high QoS) in a
Bluetooth-IP mobile environment, a pre-requisite for our discussion
is seamless data transmission. A cascading system
with fair resource allocation scheme, seamless handoff strategy
, and transparent bridging system that provides a way
of integrating IP networks and Bluetooth-based service networks
to relay multimedia applications within residual and
enterprise is thus inevitable [6].
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The following
section describes Bluetooth background information,
including the piconet, scatternet, IP over Bluetooth service architecture
. Section 3 presents the proposed QoS-centric cascading
mechanism, including the intra-piconet resource allocation
, inter-piconet handoff, and Bluetooth-IP access system
. The simulation model and performance analysis of the
700
W.-C. CHAN ET AL.
queue length, loss rate, average delay, are introduced in section
4. Section 5 presents our concluding remarks.
Bluetooth-IP services
Figure 1 is a Bluetooth-IP service network environment.
When a BT user wants to receive a networked video stored
on a remote video server, the BT (maybe a slave in a picocell
) will initiate a connection procedure with the picocell
master. The master initiates a connection procedure with the
video server through the Bluetooth-IP access system. During
the connection state, the video stream will be fed through the
access system, master to BT user (the dotted line of figure 1).
2.1. Piconet
When two BTs establish a connection, one BT will act as
master and the other as the slave. More BTs can join the piconet
. A single piconet can accommodate up to seven active
slaves. If a slave does not need to participate in the channel
, it should still be frequency-hop synchronized and switch
to a low-power Park mode. The master can also request that
the slave enter the Park mode so the master can communicate
more than seven slave BTs. The master determines the
frequency-hop sequence, the timing and the scheduling of all
packets in the piconet.
Within a piconet, the master initiates the connection procedure
, although the application may necessitate that the master
and slave roles be exchanged. For instance, such an exchange
is necessary when a BT receives network services through
Bluetooth-IP access systems. In this circumstance, the access
system provides an IP service that may be used by many
other BTs. This situation requires that the access system be
the master of the piconet and the other BTs to act as slaves.
However, when the device is initially activated and looks for
an access system, it may be the device initiating the connection
. This will make the device the master and the access
system the slave [1].
2.2. Scatternet
Several piconets can be established and linked together to
form an ad-hoc network. This is called a scatternet. A BT
can participate in two or more overlaying piconets by applying
time multiplexing. To participate on the proper channel,
the BT should use the associated master device address and
proper clock offset to obtain the correct phase. A BT can act
as a slave in several piconets, but only as a master in a sin-Figure
1. Bluetooth-IP service network environment.
QUALITY-OF-SERVICE IN IP SERVICES
701
Figure 2. An inter-piconet node in the scatternet.
gle piconet: because two piconets with the same master are
synchronous and use the same hopping sequence. This syn-chronization
makes them one and the same piconet.
Time multiplexing must be used to switch between piconets
. In figure 2, an inter-piconet node is capable of time-sharing
between multiple piconets. This allows the traffic to
flow within and between the piconets [18]. In the case of data
links only, a BT can request to enter the Hold or Park mode
in the current piconet during which time it may join another
piconet by just changing the channel parameters. BTs in the
Sniff mode may have sufficient time to visit another piconet
in between the Sniff slots. If audio links are established, other
piconets can only be visited in the non-reserved slots.
2.3. IP networking
The LAN Access profile defines IP service access using
PPP over RFCOMM. TCP/IP runs on the PPP protocol.
BTs can receive IP services using the PPP protocol [20].
When a BT wants to receive IP service, it will find a
LAN Access Point (LAP) within radio range through inquiry
and paging. After the data links have been setup, the
LMP (Link_Manager Protocol) will process the master/slave
switch and the L2CAP/RFCOMM/PPP connection will then
be established. A suitable IP address is negotiated between
devices in the PPP layer. The BT can forward IP packets
through the LAP.
Encapsulating an Ethernet packet inside a PPP packet is
not an efficient solution. Moreover PPP is not sufficient for
ad-hoc networks that contain multiple wireless hops. The best
way of providing networking would be to Ethernet over the
L2CAP layer. The Bluetooth Network Encapsulation Protocol
(BNEP) was pursued by the Bluetooth SIG PAN working
group to provide an Ethernet-like interface to IP services [19],
as depicted in figure 3.
QoS-centric cascading mechanism
From figure 1, a BT that accesses multimedia services on
the Internet may do so through a piconet or scatternet. QoS
is critical in transmitting of different network segments. To
provide Bluetooth-IP services with differentiated quality requirements
, a QoS-centric cascading mechanism is proposed
Figure 3. BNEP protocol stack.
Figure 4. The proposed QoS-centric cascading modules.
in our research to tunnel the guaranteed applications. The operational
modules are illustrated in figure 4. The innovative
mechanism consists of three modules: intra-piconet resource
allocation, inter-piconet handoff and Bluetooth-IP access system
. These modules were developed based on the BNEP operation
scenarios.
3.1. Intra-piconet resource allocation
Two service types: Synchronous Connection Oriented (SCO)
and Asynchronous Connectionless Link (ACL) were defined
in the Bluetooth service environment. Through the QoS setup,
the ACL link can be configured to provide QoS requirements.
The ACL link can be configured with the Flush Timeout setting
, which prevents re-transmission when it is no longer
useful. Acknowledgement can be received within 1.25 ms.
This makes the delay small and it is possible to perform re-transmission
for real-time applications. The ACL link also
supports variable and asymmetrical bandwidth requirement
applications.
Currently, the IP QoS architecture is based purely on
IP-layer decision making, packet buffering and scheduling
through a single link-layer service access point. The mechanism
in the link layer has better understanding of the communications
medium status. However, simplicity has been
important design objective for the Bluetooth interface and the
number of IP-based protocols is becoming increasingly more
complex. As depicted in figure 5, QoS architecture at the
network layer such as differentiated and integrated services
provides different services to applications. These services at
702
W.-C. CHAN ET AL.
Figure 5. Bluetooth IP QoS mechanism.
Figure 6. General QoS framework.
the high layer are sufficient depending on the particular scenario
. With shared bandwidth and a re-transmission scheme,
the Host Controller (HC) buffering will invoke delays. The
HC buffer size can be decreased to reduce the buffer delay.
In bluetooth-based service layer, the L2CAP layer informs
the remote side of the non-default parameters and sends a
Configuration Request. The remote L2CAP-side responds
to the Configuration Response that agrees or disagrees with
these requirements. If the Configuration Response disagrees,
the local side sends other parameters to re-negotiate or stop
the connection. The Link Manager uses the poll interval and
repetitions for broadcast packets to support QoS. The poll interval
, which is defined as the maximum time between subsequent
transmissions from the master to a particular slave on
the ACL link, is used to support bandwidth allocation and latency
control. Figure 6 depicts the general framework, which
defines the basic functions required to support QoS.
In figure 6, the traffic and QoS requirements for the QoS
flow from the high layer sends the request to the Resource
Requester (RR). Based on this request, the RR generates a resource
request to the Resource Manager (RM). When the RM
accepts the request the RR configures parameters to the local
Resource Allocation (RA) entity. The RA actually reserves
resources to satisfy the QoS requirements. The QoS is satisfied
by the application that receives the appropriate resource.
In our scheme, bluetooth-based operation identifies the following
functions and procedures to determine the amount
of resources assigned to a traffic flow. A polling algorithm
determines which slave is polled next and bandwidth is assigned
to that slave. The slave uses the air-interface scheduler
to determine which data to send when it is polled. An
inter-piconet scheduling algorithm is used by the inter-piconet
node to efficiently control the traffic flow between two piconets
. Bluetooth also uses the Flush Timeout setting to determine
the maximum delay involved with re-transmissions.
The Link Manager module in the master selects the baseband
packet type for transmission in the single, three and five time
slots [4].
3.2. Inter-piconet handoff
The inter-piconet environment suffers many challenges. First,
the formation of Bluetooth networks is spontaneous and the
problem of scatternet formation has not been defined in the
Bluetooth specification [16]. Some researches have addressed
these issues in the formation of an efficient scatternet [5,22].
The data sent forward between nodes must been sent via the
master. Sometimes this data will traffic through multiple hops
in the scatternet. Efficient routing protocols are needed for
Bluetooth. The inter-piconet node as the bridge over which a
piconet controls communications between piconets. Smarter
traffic control is needed to coordinate with these masters. Different
data rates exist in each link in different scenarios. The
inter-piconet node becomes the bottleneck for the scatternet.
In a piconet, the master controls all of the slaves in the piconet
. The inter-piconet node joins more than two piconets,
but it is only active in one piconet at a time. To efficiently
move traffic between different piconets scheduling is needed
to coordinate the inter-piconet and the master. In Reference
[11], inter-piconet (IPS) and intra-piconet scheduling (IPRS)
were presented to interact with one another to provide an efficient
scatternet scheduler, as illustrated in figure 2. The IPS
and IPRS must coordinate with one another to schedule when
the inter-piconet node belongs to which piconet and how and
when to transfer data packets between the different masters.
Bluetooth connection progress includes two steps: the inquiry
progress and the paging progress. This causes the bottleneck
in the handoff. Two situations were discussed in
BLUEPAC. When the Access Point is the master, the mobile
node joins the piconet as a slave. The Access Point can efficiently
control the traffic to the Internet. However, the disadvantage
is that the Access Point must periodically enter the
inquiry stage to find the newly arrived mobile node. This will
interrupt the Access Point transfer a packet to the Internet. In
a situation in which the BT is the master, the Access Point
involves itself in multiple piconets. The BT can actively inquire
the Access Point when it wants to connect to the Access
Point. However, the traffic control becomes difficult and
complex when the Access Point must switch between various
piconets.
The scheduler is still not supported for seamless handoffs
in real time applications. To solve this problem, reference
[15] proposes the Next Hop Handoff Protocol (NHHP) to support
fast handoffs. The major focus is on reducing the connection
time in the strategy. A scheme that passes the inquiry
information to the next Access Point was used to avoid wasting
time in the inquiry stage. The disadvantage is that the
Access Points are divided into two categories: Entry Points
QUALITY-OF-SERVICE IN IP SERVICES
703
which constantly make inquiries to the new BT and pass information
to the Access Points in the internal regions have the
responsibility in the handoff. If a newly arrived BT is initiated
in an internal region, the scheme doesn't work.
To resolve the above problem, a fast handoff scheme was
proposed. This scheme assumes Bluetooth service environment
is a micro-cellular network architecture. However, it
also adapts Bluetooth as a macro-cellular network. Based on
the fast handoff mission, the major focus is reducing the connection
procedure that causes significant delay. We assumed
the following conditions; the Access Point and mobile BT periodically
scan for page attempts and inquiry requests. To obtain
seamless and efficient handoff support, the Access Point
RF range should cover the nearby Access Point. The neighborhood
set records all Access Point locations.
3.2.1. Connection procedure
As depicted in figure 7, when the mobile BT accesses the Internet
it initiates an inquiry to the Access Point and makes a
connection. The Access Point passes the BT addresses and
clock information to the nearest Access Point according to
the neighborhood set. The nearest Access Point uses this
information to page the BT and form the piconets. These
piconets form the scatternet and the BT becomes the inter-piconet
node between them. The BT depends on the received
signal strength indicator (RSSI) to determine which Access
Point to use to access the Internet. The BT is a dedicated
Access Point only in the connection state. The remaining piconets
are all in the Hold state.
3.2.2. Handoff
The BT periodically monitors the RSSI and bit error rate.
When the RSSI decreases to the lower threshold a handoff
may take place. To know where the mobile BT moves, the
BT detects which RSSI becomes stronger. It then informs the
Access Points and Foreign Agent that a handoff is imminent
(figure 8(A)). The BT leaves the Hold state to the connection
state in the piconet that contains the coming Access Point
(AP0 in figure 8(B)). The routing path also changes to a new
path. Additional caches may be needed in the Access Point
to avoid packet losses. The new nearest Access Point (APa
in figure 8(C)) in accordance with the neighbor set is notified
that the mobile BT is within range to receive BT information
. It begins to page the BT and enter the Hold state with
the BT. The original connection state also turns into the Hold
state in the piconet that contains the original access (AP1 in
figure 8(D)).
When the BT does not seek access service from the Access
Point it should inform the Access Point that it no longer
wants a connection. A connection could break down without
prior warning. In the Bluetooth specification, both the master
and slave use the link supervision time to supervise the loss.
The supervision timeout period is chosen so that the value is
longer than the hold periods.
For simplicity of discussion we assumed that the Bluetooth
AP is the application sender and divided the architecture into
two parts, wired parts: the correspondent node (CN) to the
Bluetooth AP and wireless part: the Bluetooth AP to the mobile
BT device. The wired part is the same as the current
general mechanism. We will only discuss the mechanism
that combines the wireless part and our handoff mechanism
in the Bluetooth environment. After making a connection and
switching roles as mentioned earlier, the Bluetooth AP becomes
a master. As illustrated in figure 9, the Bluetooth AP1
sends an active PATH message to the BT in figure 9(1). After
the BT receives the PATH message, if the BT needs RSVP
Figure 7. Connection procedures.
704
W.-C. CHAN ET AL.
Figure 8. Handoff procedures.
Figure 9. RSVP messages for bluetooth resource reservation.
support, it sends a resource reservation request with a RESV
message to the AP1 in figure 9(2). When the traffic specification
contains a RSVP message, the traffic and QoS requirements
for the QoS flow from the high layer sends a request to
the Resource Requester (RR). The Bluetooth low levels will
thus coordinate with one another.
Once the Bluetooth AP1 accepts the request, the reservation
along the flow between the AP1 and BT is made. After
this point, the Bluetooth AP1 must have reservations in
the neighboring APs. The resource reservation request is the
same as an active reservation. The current AP1 sends a Passive
PATH message to the neighboring AP2. The AP2 responds
with a Passive RESV message and reserves the resources
that the BT may need. Because Bluetooth can have
only seven active slaves in a piconet at the same time, the
resources must be used efficiently. One way is adding more
Bluetooth devices in an AP. This can be easily achieved by
modifying the application layer.
As discussed before, to support seamless handoffs, information
about the BT is sent to the AP2 after the RSVP process
is performed. The Hold state is maintained between the BT
and AP2. However, if the BT does not need a QoS guarantee,
Figure 10. The protocol stack for Bluetooth-IP interworking.
the QoS mechanism is not added. After supporting the end-to
-end QoS using the RSVP protocol, the packet classification
and scheduler can be used to control the traffic.
3.3. Bluetooth-IP access system
Th difference between existing Bluetooth piconets and IP
LANs is the communication protocol stack illustrated in figure
10. From figure 10, these differences are shown in the
lower OSI seven layers. The lower layers are responsible for
connection and addressing. We therefore focused on the connection
management and address resolution issues in our research
.
The access function allows connections to be established
without requiring any particular knowledge or interaction.
The Bluetooth-IP access system plays the role of bridg-ing/routing
multimedia traffic between the various LANs and
piconets. Their operational scenario is illustrated in figure 11.
When different piconet devices are connected directly to
the access system, the access system function is referred to
as a bridge (piconet Master and Slave role). If a LAN host
(piconet BT) communicates with a piconet BT (LAN host)
through the access system, because of the different protocol
stacks between the piconet and LAN networks, two issues,
addressing and connection must be resolved in the design.
QUALITY-OF-SERVICE IN IP SERVICES
705
Figure 11. Bluetooth-IP interworking operational scenario.
3.3.1. Address resolution
To achieve the interconnection function in a Bluetooth-IP environment
, the access system must refer to both the piconet
and LAN networks as members. Thus, two different protocol
stacks must be combined to form a new communication protocol
stack suitable as a routing server. The combined protocol
stack is shown in figure 10. Using the protocol stack specifications
, a scenario for addressing is identified as follows:
Step 1: Each LAN host assigns an IP address. Each host thus
possesses two addresses; an IP address and a MAC
address.
Step 2: Each piconet BT acquires two addresses, a BT address
(BD_ADDR) and an IP address.
Step 3: A routing table must be built for interconnection in
the access system.
A lookup for destination addresses
is needed to find the corresponding outbound
BD_ADDR or MAC address to which the packet
must be forwarded.
3.3.2. Connection management
Because the existing LAN is a packet switching service and
BT connections are made on an ad hoc basis, interconnection
is very difficult. To solve this problem, a mechanism based
on IP services over Bluetooth was proposed in the Bluetooth
specification. The system is as follows.
Step 1: Bluetooth adapters and an Ethernet card are embed-ded
into a desktop computer. These adapters and card
are referred to as network attachment units (wired or
Figure 12. The Bluetooth-IP access system.
radio). Each port in the interface is directly attached
to different networks (see figure 12).
Step 2: The API of the Bluetooth adapter and the Ethernet
packet driver are used to design an access system.
The operational procedures for this system follow the
scenario in figure 11.
Performance analysis
The Bluehoc toolkit was used to simulate the various scenarios
in the Bluetooth-IP service environment. As depicted
in figure 13, the data is dumped from the L2CA_DataWrite
706
W.-C. CHAN ET AL.
Figure 13. L2CAP packet flow.
and L2CA_DataRead into the connection state. The
L2CA_DataWrite and L2CA_DataRead events are the upper-Layer
to the L2CAP events. The L2CA_DataRead is the
event that requests transfer for received data from the L2CAP
entity to the upper layer. The L2CA_DataWrite is the event
that requests data transfer from the upper layer to the L2CAP
entity for transmission over an open channel.
In the Bluehoc toolkit the connection procedures such as
inquiry and paging are simulated according to the Bluetooth
specifications. The master sends the QoS parameters, which
depend on the application. QoS parameters are then passed
to the Deficit Round Robin (DRR) based scheduler that determines
if the connection can be accepted by the LMP. The
DRR-based scheduler finds the appropriate ACL link baseband
packet type (DM1, DM3, DM5, DH1, DH3 and DH5)
depending upon the application level MTU and loss sensitivity
. The simulation applications include packetized voice,
Telnet and FTP.
4.2. Simulation results
In figure 14 the average delay for various numbers of slaves
using packetized voice in a piconet is shown. The voice application
is real time and would be sensitive to a loss of several
consecutive small packets. Figure 15 shows the average delay
in the mixed traffic source. The short-packet delay, such
as telnet applications, are significantly increased by the long-packet
in the DRR-based scheduler. An efficient and simple
scheme that does not add to the Bluetooth load is important.
4.2.1. Queue length analysis
The queue length analysis was based on the access system
queue size. We observed the variations in queue length using
specified traffic levels. In figure 16, the queue length of the
traffic from 100 M LAN to 1 M piconet increases very fast.
It reaches 50000 packets within 10 s. The queue length for
the traffic from 10 M LAN to 1 M piconet increases more
smoothly and the queue length of the traffic from 1 M piconet
to 100 M or 10 M LANs is almost zero.
Figure 14. Average delay with voice services.
Figure 15. Average delay in the mixed traffic.
Figure 16. Queue length analysis.
4.2.2. Loss rate analysis
In the loss rate analysis the queue length was changed to observe
the variations in the loss rate. In figure 17, when the
queue length is smaller than 1000 packets, the loss rate is
close to 0.9. When the queue length increases to 5000 packets
, the loss rate decreases to 0.8. Therefore, increasing the
queue length will decrease the traffic loss rate. The loss rate
from 100M LAN to 1 M piconet is a little more than that for
10 M LAN to 1 M piconet because of the difference in the
LAN transport speed.
QUALITY-OF-SERVICE IN IP SERVICES
707
Figure 17. Loss rate analysis.
Figure 18. Throughput analysis.
4.2.3. Throughput analysis
From figure 18, increasing the queue length has no effect on
improving the throughput. The throughput is smooth in both
the LAN to piconet and piconet to LAN traffic.
4.2.4. Delay analysis
From figure 19, when the queue length is 500 packets, the
delay is about 0.0005 seconds per bit. If the queue length increases
to 1000 packets, the delay becomes almost double.
When the queue length reaches 5000 packets, the delay is
close to 0.003 seconds per bit. The transfer delay has no obvious
change when the queue length increases to 10000 packets.
Conclusions
In a wireless environment the QoS guarantee provision becomes
more important. The frequent mobility of a host increases
the service disruption in real-time applications. Even
though efficient RSVP enhances the resource reservation ability
and allows for requesting a specific QoS from the network,
these mechanisms do not have enough QoS guarantee to prevent
service disruption during handoff. In this paper a cascading
mechanism for QoS guarantee in a Bluetooth-IP environment
was proposed. A fast and efficient handoff scheme
that supports BT roaming handoffs between different Access
Points was proposed. Concepts for the mobile RSVP issues
in Bluetooth networks were presented with our fast handoff
mechanism. The Bluetooth-IP access system can be implemented
using available technology such as Network Addressing
Translation (NAT) and Linux Bluetooth Stack to connect
Bluetooth piconets and LAN. In our simulations Bluetooth
required a long time to process the inquiry and paging procedures
. These results show that the connection time is up to
11.84 sec when seven slaves join a piconet at the same time.
Moreover, the access system queue length increases by about
10000 packets per second in a 100 Mbps LAN and about 1000
packets per second in a 10 Mbps LAN when the traffic load is
80%. In the loss rate analysis, the loss rate was close to 90%
when the queue length was less than 1000 packets. However
, when the queue length increased to 10000 packets the
708
W.-C. CHAN ET AL.
Figure 19. Delay analysis.
loss rate decreased to 70%. In the delay analysis, the delay
was about 0.000045 seconds per bit when the queue length
was 500 packets. The delay doubles when the queue length
doubles. However, when the queue length is more than 5000
packets the delay has no obvious variance.
Acknowledgement
This paper is a partial result of project no. NSC-90-2218-E-259
-006 conducted by National Dong Hwa University under
the sponsorship of National Science Council, ROC.
References
[1] M. Albrecht, M. Frank, P. Martini, M. Schetelig, A. Vilavaara and A.
Wenzel, IP service over bluetooth: Leading the way to a new mobility,
in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Local Computer
Networks (1999) pp. 143­154.
[2] S. Baatz, M. Frank, R. Gopffarth, D. Kassatkine, P. Martini, M.
Schetelig and A. Vilavaara, Handoff support for mobility with IP over
bluetooth, in: Proceedings of the 25th Annual IEEE Conference on Local
Computer Networks, USA (2000) pp. 143­154.
[3] J.L. Chen and K.C. Yen, Transparent bridging support for bluetooth-IP
service interworking, International Journal of Network Management 12
(2002) 379­386.
[4] J.L. Chen, A.P. Shu, H.W. Tzeng and P.T. Lin, Fair scheduling for guaranteed
services on personal area networks, in: Proceedings of 2002
International Conference on Communications, Circuits and Systems,
China (2002) pp. 440­444.
[5] L. Ching and K.Y. Siu, A bluetooth scatternet formation algorithm, in:
Proceedings of IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, Vol. 5
(2001) pp. 2864­2869.
[6] A. Das, A. Ghose, A. Razdan, H. Saran and R. Shorey, Enhancing performance
of asynchronous data traffic over the bluetooth wireless ad-hoc
network, in: Proceedings of the IEEE INFOCOM (2001) pp. 591­
600.
[7] D. Famolari and P. Agrawal, Architecture and performance of an em-bedded
IP bluetooth personal area network, in: Proceedings of the International
Conference on Personal Wireless Communications, India
(2000) pp. 75­79.
[8] M. Frank, R. Goepffarth, W. Hansmann and U. Mueller, Transmission
of native IPv6 over bluetooth, http://www.ispras.ru/~ipv6/
docs/draft-hansmann-6overbt-00.txt
[9] C. Haartsen and S. Mattisson, Bluetooth ­ a new low-power radio interface
providing short-range connectivity, Proceedings of the IEEE
88(10) (2000) 1651­1661.
[10] G. Ivano, D. Paolo and F. Paolo, The role of Internet technology in
future mobile data systems, IEEE Communications Magazine 38(11)
(2000) 68­73.
[11] P. Johansson, R. Kapoor, M. Kazantzidis and M. Gerla, Rendezvous
scheduling in bluetooth scatternets, in: Proceedings of IEEE International
Conference on Communications, Vol. 1 (2002) pp. 318­324.
[12] D.J.Y. Lee and W.C.Y. Lee, Ricocheting bluetooth, in: Proceedings of
the 2nd International Conference on Microwave and Millimeter Wave
Technology (2000) pp. 432­435.
[13] D.G. Leeper, A long-term view of short-range wireless, IEEE Computer
34(6) (2001) 39­44.
[14] Y.B. Lin and I. Chlamtac, Wireless and Mobile Network Architectures
(Wiley, 2000).
[15] I. Mahadevan and K.M. Sivalingam, An architecture and experimental
results for quality if service in mobile networks using RSVP and CBQ,
ACM/Baltzer Wireless Networks Journal 6(3) (2000) 221­234.
[16] B. Raman, P. Bhagwat and S. Seshan, Arguments for cross-layer opti-mizations
in Bluetooth scatternets, in: Proceedings of 2001 Symposium
on Applications and the Internet (2001) pp. 176­184.
[17] T.S. Rappaport, Wireless Communications ­ Principles and Practice,
2nd ed. (2002).
[18] T. Salonidis, P. Bhagwat, L. Tassiulas and R. LaMaire, Distributed
topology construction of bluetooth personal area networks, in: Proceedings
of the IEEE INFOCOM (2001) pp. 1577­1586.
[19] The Bluetooth Special Interest Group, Bluetooth Network Encapsulation
Protocol Specification (2001).
[20] The Bluetooth Special Interest Group, Documentation available at
http://www.bluetooth.com/techn/index.asp
[21] The Bluetooth Special Interest Group,
Quality of service in
bluetooth networking, http://ing.ctit.utwente.nl/WU4/
Documents/Bluetooth_QoS_ING_A_part_I.pdf
[22] V. Zaruba, S. Basagni and I. Chlamtac, Bluetrees-scatternet formation
to enable bluetooth-based ad hoc networks, in: Proceedings of IEEE
International Conference on Communications, Vol. 1 (2001) pp. 273­
277.
QUALITY-OF-SERVICE IN IP SERVICES
709
Wah-Chun Chan received the Ph.D. degree from
University of British Columbia in 1965. He is cur-rently
a Visiting Professor in the Department of
Computer Science at National Chiao Tung University
. Dr. Chan's research interest has been in the areas
of queueing theory and telecommunication networks
.
Research on telecommunication networks
has been in the development of models for the performance
analysis of computer communication networks
.
Jiann-Liang Chen received the Ph.D. degree in
electrical engineering from National Taiwan University
, Taipei, Taiwan in 1989. Since August 1997,
he has been with the Department of Computer Science
and Information Engineering of National Dong
Hwa University, where he is a Professor now. His
current research interests are directed at cellular mobility
management and personal communication systems
