Secure Access to IP Multimedia Services Using Generic Bootstrapping Architecture (GBA) for 3G & Beyond Mobile Networks
Abstract
The IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) defined by Third Generation 
Partnership Projects (3GPP and 3GPP2) is a technology designed 
to provide robust multimedia services across roaming boundaries 
and over diverse access technologies with promising features like 
quality-of-service (QoS), reliability and security. The IMS defines 
an overlay service architecture that merges the paradigms and 
technologies of the Internet with the cellular and fixed 
telecommunication worlds. Its architecture enables the efficient 
provision of an open set of potentially highly integrated 
multimedia services, combining web browsing, email, instant 
messaging, presence, VoIP, video conferencing, application 
sharing, telephony, unified messaging, multimedia content 
delivery, etc. on top of possibly different network technologies. 
As such IMS enables various business models for providing 
seamless business and consumer multimedia applications. In this 
communication converged world, the challenging issues are 
security, quality of service (QoS) and management & 
administration. In this paper our focus is to manage secure access 
to multimedia services and applications based on SIP and HTTP 
on top of IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS). These services include 
presence, video conferencing, messaging, video broadcasting, and 
push to talk etc. We will utilize Generic Bootstrapping 
Architecture (GBA) model to authenticate multimedia 
applications before accessing these multimedia services offered by 
IMS operators. We will make enhancement in GBA model to 
access these services securely by introducing Authentication 
Proxy (AP) which is responsible to implement Transport Layer 
Security (TLS) for HTTP and SIP communication. This research 
work is part of Secure Service Provisioning (SSP) Framework for 
IP Multimedia System at Fokus Fraunhofer IMS 3Gb Testbed.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
C.2 [Computer-Communication Networks]: C.2.0 General - 
Security and protection; C.2.1 Network Architecture and Design; 
C.2.3 Network Operation.


General Terms
Algorithms, Management, Design, Reliability, Experimentation, 
Security, Standardization, Verification.

Introduction
With the emergence of mobile multimedia services, such as 
unified messaging, click to dial, across network multiparty 
conferencing and seamless multimedia streaming services, the 
convergence of networks (i.e. fixed­mobile convergence and 
voice­data integration) has  started, leading to an overall Internet­
Telecommunications convergence. In prospect of these global 
trends, the mobile communications world has defined within the 
evolution of cellular systems an All-IP Network vision which 
integrates cellular networks and the Internet. This is the IP 
Multimedia System (IMS) [1], namely overlay architecture for the 
provision of multimedia services, such as VoIP (Voice over 
Internet Protocol) and videoconferencing on top of globally 
emerging 3G (Third Generation) broadband packet networks. The 
IP Multimedia System (IMS) which is standardized by Third 
Generation Partnership Project (3GPP & 3GGP2) in releases 5 is 
an overlay network on top of GPRS/UMTS (General Packet 
Radio Systems/Universal Mobile Telecommunication Systems) 
networks and extended by ETSI TISPAN [2] for fixed line access 
network within the Next Generation Network (NGN) architecture.
The IMS provides all IP Service Delivery Platform (SDP) for 
mobile multimedia services provisioning e.g. VoIP, Video-telephony
, Multimedia conferencing, Mobile Content, Push-to-Talk
etc. and it is based on IETF protocols like SIP for session 
control, Diameter for AAA (Authentication, Authorization, and 
Auditing) and SDP (Service Delivery Protocol), RTP etc. 
Different components and parts of IMS are highlighted in figure 1 
consisting IMS Core (P-CSCF, I-CSCF, S-CSCF), IMS Client 
(UE) and Application &  Media Servers along with the concept of 
home network and visited network for roaming users on top of 
different access networks technologies.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
Q2SWinet'06, October 2, 2006, Torremolinos, Malaga, Spain. 
Copyright 2006 ACM 1-59593-486-3/06/0010...$5.00.

17
The security and data privacy is a big challenge when there is 
integration of different networks and technologies. The 
integration of different access technologies causes much 
vulnerability and hackers get access to steal financial and 
confidential information. As these hackers networks are often 
beyond the law enforcement agencies of the today's 
communication world. So the question arises how to prevent these 
hackers for performing such attacks on the corporate networks. In 
order to provide confidentiality, security and privacy, the 3G 
authentication infrastructure is a valuable and milestone 
development and asset for 3G operators. This infrastructure 
consists of authentication centre (AuC), the USIM (Universal 
Subscriber Identity Module) or ISIM (IP Multimedia Services 
Identity Module) and AKA (Authentication and Key Agreement) 
Procedure.
It has recognized that this infrastructure could utilize to enable 
application function in the network and on the user side to enable 
shared keys. Therefore, Third Generation Partnership Project 
(3GPP) has provided the bootstrapping of application security to 
authenticate the subscriber by defining a Generic Bootstrapping 
Architecture (GBA) [3] based on Authentication and Key 
Agreement (AKA) protocol. The GBA model can be utilized to 
authenticate subscriber before accessing multimedia services and 
applications over HTTP. The candidate applications to use this 
bootstrapping mechanism include but are not restricted to 
subscriber certificate distribution. These certificates supports 
services including presence, conferencing, messaging and push to 
talk etc. provided by mobile operators. The GBA model has 
enhanced by implementing Generic Authentication Architecture 
(GAA) [4] to provide secure assess over HTTP using TLS 
(Transport Layer Security).
In prospective of the advancement of telecommunication, the 
Fraunhofer Fokus established a Third Generation & beyond (3Gb) 
Testbed and IMS Testbed [5] for research & development and 
educational purpose to provide state-of-the-art knowledge to 
engineers, researchers, educationists and technologists in this area 
of modern telecommunication. Fokus Fraunhofer has developed a 
Secure Service Provisioning (SSP) Framework [6] for IMS 
Testbed to provide security, privacy and authentication of 
subscriber as well as confidential and protection to the network 
resources of 3G operators.
The paper is organised as: section 2 is about IMS as platform for 
multimedia services, sections 3, 4 and 5 explain generic 
bootstrapping architecture, bootstrapping authentication 
procedure and its application usage procedure respectively. 
Section 6 discusses the use of authentication proxy for 
implementing TLS for securing multimedia services. In section 7, 
we will discus briefly the IMS Testbed at Fokus and than 
concludes the paper in last section.
IMS - Platform for Next Generation Multimedia Services
The IMS defines service provision architecture, and it can be 
considered as the next generation service delivery platform. It 
consists of modular design with open interfaces and enables the 
flexibility for providing multimedia services over IP technology. 
The IMS does not standardize specific services but uses standard 
service enablers e.g. presence, GLMS/XDMS etc. and supports
inherently multimedia over IP, VoIP, Internet Multimedia and 
presence. In IMS architecture, SIP protocol use as the standard 
signaling protocol that establishes controls, modifies and 
terminates voice, video and messaging sessions between two or 
more participants. The related signaling servers in the architecture 
are referred to as Call State Control Functions (CSCFs) and 
distinguished by their specific functionalities. It is important to 
note that an IMS compliant end user system has to provide the 
necessary IMS protocol support, namely SIP, and the service 
related media codecs for multimedia applications in addition to 
basic connectivity support, e.g. GPRS, WLAN, etc. The IMS is 
designed to provide number of key capabilities required to enable 
new IP services via mobile and fixed networks. The important key 
functionalities which enable new mobile IP services are:
Multimedia session negotiation and management 
  Quality of service management 
 Mobility
management
Service execution, control and interaction 
  Privacy and security management

Figure 1:- IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) Architecture

In IMS specification, Application Server (AS) provides the 
service logic and service creation environment for applications 
and services. The AS is intended to influence and maintain the 
various IMS SIP sessions on behalf of the services. It can behave 
as a termination point for signaling, redirecting or forwarding SIP 
requests. It also can act as third party call control unit. Services in 
this instance refer to IMS services, which are based on the IMS 
reference points (e.g. instant messaging, presence, conferencing 
etc.). The advantage of application server is to enable IMS to 
operate in a more flexible and dynamic way, whereas the AS 
provides more intelligence to the system. Most Application 
Servers are closed boxes which map network functions (e.g. via 
OSA gateways) or signaling protocols (SIP) onto application 
programming interfaces based on a particular technology (Java,
18
CORBA, web-services). An alternative approach pursued by the 
Open Mobile Alliance (OMA) is strongly related to the service 
oriented methodology, which follows the top-down approach 
beginning with service design down to service mapping over the 
underlying network technologies. The SIP services can be 
developed and deployed on a SIP application server using several 
technologies such as SIP servlets, Call Processing Language 
(CPL) script, SIP Common Gateway Interface (CGI) and JAIN 
APIs.

Generic Bootstrapping Architecture (GBA)
Different 3G Multimedia Services including video conferencing, 
presence, push to talk etc. has potential usage of Generic 
Bootstrapping Architecture (GBA) to distribute subscriber 
certificates. These certificates are used by mobile operators to 
authenticate the subscriber before accessing the multimedia 
services and applications. Now we discuss components, entities 
and interfaces of GBA.
3.1  GBA Components and Entities
The GBA consists of five entities: UE (User Equipment), NAF 
(Network Authentication Function), BSF (Bootstrapping Server 
Function) and HSS (Home Subscriber Server) and are explained 
below as specified in 3GPP standards (shown in figure 2).
User Equipment: UE is UICC (Universal Integrated Circuit 
Card) containing USIM or ISIM related information that supports 
HTTP Digest AKA (Authentication & Key Agreement) and NAF 
(Network Authentication Function) specific protocols. A USIM 
(Universal Subscriber Identity Module) is an application for 
UMTS mobile telephony running on a UICC smartcard which is 
inserted in a 3G mobile phone. It stores user subscriber 
information, authentication information and provides with storage 
space for text messages. An IP Multimedia Services Identity 
Module (ISIM) is an application running on a UICC smartcard in 
a 3G telephone in the IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS). It contains 
parameters for identifying and authenticating the user to the IMS. 
The ISIM application can co-exist with SIM and USIM on the 
same UICC making it possible to use the same smartcard in both 
GSM networks and earlier releases of UMTS.
Bootstrapping Server Function (BSF): It hosts in a network 
element under the control of mobile network operator. The BSF, 
HSS, and UEs participate in GBA in which a shared secret is 
established between the network and a UE by running the 
bootstrapping procedure. The shared secret can be used between 
NAFs and UEs, for example, for authentication purposes. A 
generic Bootstrapping Server Function (BSF) and the UE shall 
mutually authenticate using the AKA protocol, and agree on 
session keys that are afterwards applied between UE and a 
Network Application Function (NAF). The BSF shall restrict the 
applicability of the key material to a specific NAF by using the 
key derivation procedure. The key derivation procedure may be 
used with multiple NAFs during the lifetime of the key material. 
The lifetime of the key material is set according to the local policy 
of the BSF. The BSF shall be able to acquire the GBA User 
security Settings (GUSS) from HSS [3].

Figure 2: Network Entities of GBA

Network Authentication Function: NAF has the functionality to 
locate and communicate securely with subscriber's BSF 
(Bootstrapping Server Function). It should be able to acquire a 
shared key material established between the UE and the BSF 
during application specific protocol runs.
Home Subscriber Server: HSS stores GBA user security settings 
(GUSSs). The GUSS is defined in such a way that interworking of 
different operators for standardized application profiles is 
possible. It also supports operator specific application profiles 
without the standardized of existing application profiles. The 
GUSS shall be able to contain application-specific USSs that 
contain parameters that relates to key selection indication, 
identification or authorization information of one or more 
applications hosted by one ore more NAFs. Any other types of 
parameters are not allowed in the application-specific USS [3].
Diameter-Proxy: In case where UE has contacted NAF of visited 
network than home network, this visited NAF will use diameter 
proxy (D-Proxy) of NAFs network to communicate with 
subscriber's BSF (i.e. home BSF). D-Proxy's general 
functionality requirements include [3]:
D-Proxy functions as a proxy between visited NAF and 
subscriber's home BSF and it will be able to locate subscriber's 
home BSF and communicate with it over secure channel.  
  The D-Proxy will be able to validate that the visited NAF is 
authorized to participate in GBA and shall be able to assert to 
subscriber's home BSF the visited NAFs DNS name.  
  The D-Proxy shall also be able to assert to the BSF that the 
visited NAF is authorized to request the GBA specific user 
profiles contained in the NAF request.
19

Figure 3: Bootstrapping Authentication Procedure

3.2  GBA Reference Points
Ub: The reference point Ub is between the UE and the BSF and 
provides mutual authentication between them. It allows the UE to 
bootstrap the session keys based on 3GPP AKA infrastructure. 
The HTTP Digest AKA protocol is used on the reference point 
Ub. It is based on the 3GPP AKA [7] protocol.
Ua: The reference point Ua carries the application protocol, which 
is secured using the keys material agreed between UE and BSF as 
a result of running of HTTP Digest AKA over reference point Ub. 
For instance, in case of support for subscriber certificates, it is a 
protocol, which allows the user to request certificates from NAF. 
In this case, NAF would be PKI portal.
Zh: The reference point Zh used between BSF and HSS. It allows 
BSF to fetch the required authentication information and all GBA 
user security settings from HSS. The interface to 3G
Authentication Centre is HSS-internal, and it need not be 
standardised as part of this architecture.
Zn: The reference point Zn is used by the NAF to fetch the key 
material agreed during a previous HTTP Digest AKA protocol run 
over the reference point Ub from the UE to the BSF. It is also 
used to fetch application-specific user security settings from the 
BSF, if requested by the NAF.

Bootstrapping Authentication Procedure
The UE and Network Authentication Function (NAF) have to 
decide whether to use GBA before the start of communication 
between them. When UE wants to interact with NAF, it starts 
communication with NAF over Ua interface without GBA 
parameters. If NAF requires the use of shared keys obtained by 
means of GBA, but the request from UE does not include GBA-related
parameters, the NAF replies with a bootstrapping initiation 
message [3]. When UE wants to interact with NAF, and it knows
20
that the bootstrapping procedure is needed, it shall first perform a 
bootstrapping authentication as shown in figure 3. Otherwise, the 
UE shall perform a bootstrapping authentication only when it has 
received  bootstrapping initiation required message or a 
bootstrapping negotiation indication from the NAF, or when the 
lifetime of the key in UE has expired. The UE sends an HTTP 
request to the BSF and the BSF retrieves the complete set of GBA 
user security settings and one Authentication Vector (AV) [8] as 
given in equation 1 over the reference point Zh from the HSS.
AV = RAND||AUTN||XRES||CK||IK
------------------- Eq. 1
After that BSF forwards the RAND and AUTN to the UE in the 
401 message without the CK, IK and XRES. This is to demand 
the UE to authenticate itself. The UE checks AUTN to verify that 
the challenge is from an authorized network; the UE also 
calculates CK, IK and RES [8]. This will result in session keys IK 
and CK in both BSF and UE. The UE sends another HTTP 
request to the BSF, containing the Digest AKA response which is 
calculated using RES.
The BSF authenticates the UE by verifying the Digest AKA 
response. The BSF generates key material Ks by concatenating 
CK and IK and it also generates B-TID (Bootstrapping 
Transaction Identifier) which is used to bind the subscriber 
identity to the keying material in reference points Ua, Ub and Zn. 
The BSF shall send a 200 OK message, including a B-TID to the 
UE to indicate the success of the authentication and the lifetime of 
the key Ks. The key material Ks is generated in UE by 
concatenating CK and IK. Both the UE and the BSF shall use the 
Ks to derive the key material Ks-NAF which will be used for 
securing the reference point Ua. The Ks-NAF is computed as 
equation 2.
Ks-NAF = f
KD
(Ks, &quot;gba-me&quot;, RAND, IMPI, NAF-ID) ----- Eq. 2
where f
KD
is the key derivation function and will be implemented
in the ME, and the key derivation parameters consist of user's 
IMPI, NAF-ID and RAND. The NAF-ID consists of the full DNS 
name of the NAF, concatenated with the Ua security protocol 
identifier. The UE and the BSF shall store the key Ks with the 
associated B-TID for further use, until the lifetime of Ks has 
expired, or until the key Ks is updated [3].
Bootstrapping Usage Procedure
Before communication between the UE and the NAF can start, the 
UE and the NAF first have to agree whether to use shared keys 
obtained by means of the GBA. If the UE does not know whether 
to use GBA with this NAF, it uses the initiation of bootstrapping 
procedure. Once the UE and the NAF have decided that they want 
to use GBA then every time the UE wants to interact with NAF. 
The UE starts communication over reference point Ua with the 
NAF by supplying the B-TID to the NAF to allow the NAF to 
retrieve the corresponding keys from the BSF. The NAF starts 
communication over reference point Zn with BSF.  The NAF 
requests key material corresponding to the B-TID supplied by the 
UE to the NAF over reference point Ua. With the key material 
request, the NAF shall supply NAF's public hostname that UE has 
used to access NAF to BSF, and BSF shall be able to verify that 
NAF is authorized to use that hostname. The NAF may also 
request one or more application-specific USSs for the 
applications, which the request received over Ua from UE may 
access.
The BSF derives the keys required to protect the protocol used 
over reference point Ua from the key Ks and the key derivation 
parameters. Than it supplies requested key Ks-NAF, 
bootstrapping time and the lifetime of the key to NAF. If the key 
identified by the B-TID supplied by the NAF is not available at 
the BSF, the BSF shall indicate this in the reply to the NAF. The 
NAF then indicates a bootstrapping renegotiation request to the 
UE. The BSF may also send the private user identity (IMPI) and 
requested USSs to NAF according to the BSF's policy. The NAF 
continues with the protocol used over the reference point Ua with 
the UE. Once the run of the protocol used over reference point Ua 
is completed the purpose of bootstrapping is fulfilled as it enabled 
UE and NAF to use reference point Ua in a secure way.

Figure 4: Bootstrapping Application


Authentication Proxy Usage for Multimedia Services
Authentication Proxy (AP) is like a Network Authentication 
Function (NAF) and performs the function of HTTP proxy for the 
UE. It is responsible to handle the Transport Layer Security (TLS) 
and implement the secure HTTP channel between AP and UE as 
shown in figure 5. It utilizes the generic bootstrapping 
architecture to assure the application servers (ASs) that the 
request is coming from an authorized subscriber of mobile
21
network operator. When HTTPS request is sent to AS through 
AP, the AP performs UE authentication. The AP may insert the 
user identity when it forwards the request to application server. 
Figure 5b presents the architecture view of using AP for different 
IMS SIP services e.g. presence, messaging, conferencing etc.
Figure 5: Authentication Proxy
The UE shall manipulate own data such as groups, through the 
Ua/Ut reference point [4]. The reference point Ut will be 
applicable to data manipulation of IMS based SIP services, such 
as Presence, Messaging and Conferencing services. When the 
HTTPS client starts communication via Ua reference point with 
the NAF, it shall establish a TLS tunnel with the NAF. The NAF 
is authenticated to the HTTPS client by means of a public key 
certificate. The HTTPS client will verify that the server certificate 
corresponds to the FQDN (Fully Qualified Domain Name) of the 
AP it established the tunnel with. We explain the procedure 
briefly as:  
The HTTPS client sends an HTTP request to NAF inside the TLS 
tunnel. In response to HTTP request over Ua interface, the AP 
will invoke HTTP digest with HTTPS client in order to perform 
client authentication using the shared keys. On the receipt of 
HTTPS digest from AP, the client will verify that the FDQN 
corresponds the AP it established the TLS connection with, if not 
the client will terminate the TLS connection with the AP.  In this 
way the UE and AP are mutually authenticated as the TLS tunnel 
endpoints.  
Now we discuss an example that application residing on UICC 
(Universal Integrated Circuit Card) may use TLS over HTTP in 
Generic Authentication Architecture (GAA) mechanism to secure
its communication with Authentication Proxy (AP). The GBA 
security association between a UICC-based application and AP 
could establish as:

Figure 6: HTTPS and BIP (Bearer Independent Protocol)
Procedures
The ME (Mobile Equipment) executes the bootstrapping 
procedure with the BSF supporting the Ub reference point. The 
UICC, which hosts the HTTPS client, runs the bootstrapping 
usage procedure with AP supporting the Ua reference point [9]. 
Figure 6 shows the use of BIP (Bearer Independent Protocol) to 
establish the HTTPS connection between UICC and AP. When 
UICC opens channel with AP as described in [10] than an active 
TCP/IP connection establishes between UICC and AP.

Fokus IMS Testbed
In face of the current challenges within telecommunications 
market are mainly consequences of insufficient early access to 
new enabling technologies by all market players. , In this 
development Fraunhofer Institute FOKUS, known as a leading 
research institute in the field of open communication systems, has 
established with support of German Ministry of Education and 
Research (BMBF) a 3G beyond Testbed, known as "National 
Host for 3Gb Applications". This Testbed provides technologies 
and related know-how in the field of fixed and wireless next 
generation network technologies and related service delivery
22
platforms. As a part of 3Gb Testbed, the FOKUS Open IMS 
Playground is deployed as an open technology test field with the 
target to validate existing and emerging IMS standards and to 
extend the IMS appropriately to be used on top of new access 
networks as well as to provide new seamless multimedia 
applications [11]. All major IMS core components, i.e., x-CSCF, 
HSS, MG, MRF, Application Servers, Application Server 
Simulators, service creation toolkits, and demo applications are 
integrated into one single environment and can be used and 
extended for R&D activities by academic and industrial partners. 
All these components can be used locally on top of all available 
access technologies or can be used over IP tunnels remotely.
Users of the "Open IMS playground" can test their components 
performing interoperability tests. The SIP Express Router (SER), 
one of the fastest existing SIP Proxies, can be used as a reference 
implementation and to proof interoperability with other SIP 
components [11]. The major focal point of IMS Playground is to 
put Application Server aside. Varieties of platforms enable rapid 
development of innovative services.

Figure 7: Fokus IMS Testbed

The Open IMS playground is deployed as an open technology test 
field with the target to develop prototype and validate existing and 
emerging NGN/IMS standard components. It extends the IMS 
architecture and protocols appropriately to be used on top of new 
access networks as well as to provide new seamless multimedia 
applications. It is important to stress that all components have 
been developed by FOKUS as reference implementations, such as 
an own open source IMS core system (to be publicly released in 
2006 based on the famous SIP Express Router), IMS Clients and 
application servers (SIPSee), and HSS. The  IMS  playground  is 
used on the one hand as the technology basis for own industry 
projects performed for national and international vendors and 
network operators as well as for more mid term academic R&D 
projects in the European IST context. In addition, the playground 
is used by others as well, i.e. FOKUS is providing consultancy
and support services around the IMS playground. Users of the 
"Open IMS playground", e.g. vendors, are testing their 
components performing interoperability and benchmarking tests. 
Application developers are developing new IMS applications 
based on various programming platforms provided, i.e. 
IN/CAMEL, OSA/Parlay, JAIN, SIP Servlets, etc., and gain a 
proof of concept implementation.. The different platform options, 
each with their strengths and weaknesses, can be selected and 
used according to the customers' needs. Figure 7 displays the 
Open IMS playground partner components.

Conclusion
In this paper, we have presented the architecture of secure access 
and authentication of IP Multimedia Services based of SIP and 
HTTP communication using GBA (Generic Bootstrapping 
Architecture) as recommended by 3GPP and TISPAN as a part of 
Secure Service Provisioning (SSP) Framework of IMS at Fokus 
Fraunhofer IMS and 3Gb Testbed.

REFERENCES
[1]   Third Generation Partnership Project; Technical
Specification Group Services and System Aspects; TS 
23.228 IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS), Stage 2 / 3GPP2 
X.S0013-002-0 v1.0, www.3gpp.org.
[2]   ETSI TISPAN (Telecommunications and Internet converged
Services and Protocols for Advanced Networking) WG 
http://portal.etsi.org/tispan/TISPAN_ToR.asp.
[3]  Third Generation Partnership Project; Technical
Specification Group Services and System Aspects; Generic 
Authentication Architecture (GAA); Generic Bootstrapping 
Architecture (GBA) (Release 7), 3GPP TS 33.220 V7 
(2005).
[4]  Third Generation Partnership Project; Technical
Specification Group Services and System Aspects; Generic 
Authentication Architecture (GAA); Access to Network 
Application Functions using Hypertext Transfer Protocol 
over Transport Layer Security (HTTPS) (Release 7), 3GPP 
TS 33.222 V7 (2005).
[5]  Third Generation & Beyond (3Gb) Testbed,
www.fokus.fraunhofer.de/national_host &

IP Multimedia System (IMS) Playground 
www.fokus.fraunhofer.de/ims.
[6]  M. Sher, T. Magedanz, "Secure Service Provisioning
Framework (SSPF) for IP Multimedia System and Next 
Generation Mobile Networks" 3rd International Workshop in 
Wireless Security Technologies, London, U.K. (April 2005), 
IWWST'05 Proceeding (101-106), ISSN 1746-904X.
[7]  Third Generation Partnership Project; Technical
Specification Group Services and System Aspects; 3G 
Security; Security Architecture (Release 6); 3GPP, TS 
33.102 V6 (2004).
[8]  M. Sher, T. Magedanz: &quot;Network Access Security
Management (NASM) Model for Next Generation Mobile 
Telecommunication Networks&quot;, IEEE/IFIP MATA'2005, 2
nd

International Workshop on Mobility Aware Technologies 
and Applications - Service Delivery Platforms for Next 
Generation Networks, Montreal, Canada, October 17-19, 
2005, Proceeding Springer-Verlag LNCS 3744-0263, Berlin
23
Heidelberg  2005, pp. 263-272. 
http://www.congresbcu.com/mata2005
[9]  Third Generation Partnership Project; Technical
Specification Group Services and System Aspects; Generic 
Authentication Architecture (GAA); Early Implementation of 
HTTPS Connection between a Universal Integrated Circuit 
Card (UICC) and Network Application Function (NAF) 
(Release 7), 3GPP TR 33.918 V7 (2005).
[10] Third Generation Partnership Project; Technical
Specification Group Core Network and Terminals; Universal 
Subscriber Identity Module (USIM) Application Toolkit 
(USAT) (Release 7), 3GPP TS 31.111 V7 (2005).
[11] K. Knüttel, T.Magedanz, D. Witszek: "The IMS Playground
@ Fokus ­ an Open Testbed for Next Generation Network 
Multimedia Services",  1
st
Int. IFIP Conference on Testbeds
and Research Infrastructures for the Development of 
Networks and Communities (Tridentcom), Trento, Italian, 
February 23 - 25, 2005, Proceedings pp. 2 ­ 11, IBSN 0-7695
-2219-x, IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, 
California.
Acronyms
3GPP
Third Generation Partnership Project
3GPP2
Third Generation Partnership Project 2
AAA
Authentication, Authorisation, and Accounting
AKA
Authentication and Key Agreement
AP Authentication
Proxy
AS
Application Server
AuC Authentication
Centre
AV Authentication
Function
BGA
Generic Bootstrapping Architecture
BSF
Bootstrapping Server Function
B-TID
Bootstrapping Transaction Identifier
CAMEL
Customized Applications for Mobile Enhanced Logic
CGI
Common Gateway Interface
CK Cipher
Key
CORBA
Common Object Request Broker Architecture
CPL
Call Programming Language
CSCFs
Call State Control Functions
DNS
Domain Name Server
FMC
Fixed Mobile Convergence
FQDN
Fully Qualified Domain Name
GAA
Generic Authentication Architecture
GPRS
General Packet Radio System
GUSS
GBA User Security Settings
HSS
Home Subscriber Server
HTTP
Hyper Text Transfer Protocol
HTTPS
HTTP ­ Secure ( HTTP over TLS)
ICSCF
Interrogating Call State Control Function
IETF
Internet Engineering Task Force
IK Integrity
Key
IM
IP Multimedia
IMPI
IP Multimedia Private Identity
IMS
IP Multimedia Subsystem
IN
Intelligent Network
IP Internet
Protocol
ISIM
IM Service Identity Module
Ks Session
Key
ME Mobile
Equipment
MG Media
Gate
MRF
Media Resource Function
NAF
Network Authentication Function
NGN
Next Generation Network
OMA
Open Mobile Alliance
OSA
Open Service Access
PCSCF
Proxy Call State Control Function
PDP
Packet Data Protocol
PoC
PPT over Cellular
PTT
Push To Talk
QoS
Quality of Service
RES Response 
RTP
Real-time Transport Protocol
SCSCF
Serving Call State Control Function
SDP
Service Delivery Platform
SER
SIP Express Router
SIP
Session Initiation Protocol
SSP
Secure Service Provisioning
TCP
Transmission Control Protocol
TISPAN
Telecoms & Internet converged Services & Protocols 
for Advanced Networks
TLS
Transport Layer Security
UE User
Equipment
UICC
Universal Integrated Circuit Card
UMTS
Universal Mobile Telecommunication Standard
USIM
Universal Subscriber Identity Module
WLAN
Wireless Local Area Network


24

