Through Different Eyes ­ Assessing Multiple Conceptual Views for Querying Web Services
ABSTRACT
We present enhancements for UDDI / DAML-S registries allowing
cooperative discovery and selection of Web services with a 
focus on personalization. To find the most useful service in each 
instance of a request, not only explicit parameters of the request 
have to be matched against the service offers. Also user preferences
or implicit assumptions of a user with respect to common 
knowledge in a certain domain have to be considered to improve 
the quality of service provisioning. In the area of Web services 
the notion of service ontologies together with cooperative answering
techniques can take a lot of this responsibility. However, 
without quality assessments for the relaxation of service requests 
and queries a personalized service discovery and selection is virtually
impossible. This paper focuses on assessing the semantic 
meaning of query relaxation plans over multiple conceptual views 
of the service ontology, each one representing a soft query constraint
of the user request. Our focus is on the question what constitutes
a minimum amount of necessary relaxation to answer each 
individual request in a cooperative manner. Incorporating such 
assessments as early as possible we propose to integrate ontology-based
discovery directly into UDDI directories or query facilities 
in service provisioning portals. Using the quality assessments 
presented here, this integration promises to propel today's Web 
services towards an intuitive user-centered service provisioning.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.5 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Online Information 
Services­ Web-based services.

General Terms
Algorithms, Human Factors, Design.

INTRODUCTION
Web services are expected to provide an open platform not only 
for electronic B2B interaction, but also for the provisioning of so-called
user-centered services, i.e. B2C services that can provide 
useful information and a variety of service offers to support users 
in a modern mobile lifestyle. Though the capabilities of such services
are still relatively simple, their sophistication will grow with 
the improvement of (wireless) networks, bandwidths, and client 
device capabilities. However, finding the adequate service for 
subsequent use of each individual user becomes a more and more 
demanding problem. Given the convergence of networks in forthcoming
(mobile) environments and the evolving innovative business
models for third party service deployment (e.g. NTT 
DoCoMo's i-mode service certification/licensing model for mobile
service portals<A href="193.html#10"> [19]) the variety of services is even expected 
to grow. Making an informed choice of the `right' service will 
therefore include matching individual users' preferences or dislikes
against the concepts and capabilities of the services offered.
Usually the interaction process for Web services consists of three 
distinct phases: a discovery of possible services, the selection of 
the most useful, and the subsequent execution. In understanding 
what a service actually offers the first two phases are crucial and 
the general acceptance of user-centered services will depend on 
the solutions of still demanding problems in interaction like cooperative
querying. As sh<A href="193.html#9">own in [4] and [5]<A href="193.html#10"> the discovery and selection
processes of user-centered Web services involves a high degree
of respect for user preferences to be flexible enough for real 
world use. In that respect providing user-centered services 
strongly differs from the well-defined capabilities of traditional 
B2B services. As a running example of a typical user-centered 
service we will use an extension of the cooperative restaurant 
booking Web service <A href="193.html#9">presented in [4]: restaurant booking services 
subscribe to the least general applicable node along a complex 
service ontology for a number of characteristics. A service request 
can then be performed including a choice of various individual 
categories. However, the individual services offered will usually 
only more or less match all the user's expectations. Ranking services
with respect to requests is thus an ongoing challenge, as is 
also evident from the research areas of IR or Web search engines 
for information provisioning.
Service providers almost always can anticipate some typical interactions
with their services. For our example typical tasks are 
for instance booking a certain restaurant for a specific evening, 
finding a suitable restaurant in the vicinity for lunch, etc. The 
characteristics and input parameters for Web services for restaurant
booking thus usually contain a number of general input values
that can be specified in a service request/query: the name of 
the restaurant, its location, its specific address, the type of cuisine, 
the date and time for a booking, its price range or even third party 
content like recommendations (e.g. the Zagat reviews). However, 
from a service provisioning point of view the nature of these parameters
strongly differs. A user expecting to book a certain restaurant
on a specific evening will expect that the request may be

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 
WWW 2004, May 17-22, 2004, New York, NY USA. 
ACM 1-58113-912-8/04/0005.

196
granted or may fail depending on current reservations of that restaurant
for the given date, but relaxing the constraints of the date 
given or booking a different restaurant for the evening might simply
not do. In contrast a user simply wishing for a close-by restaurant
to have lunch will rarely provide such fixed terms as a restaurants
name, but rather use descriptive terms like a preferred cuisine
and an approximate location.
service request
service providers
...
service n implementation
service 1 implementation
service providers
...
service n implementation
service 1 implementation
e
x
ecutio
n
UDDI registry
...
service 1 interface
service n interface
UDDI registry
...
service 1 interface
service n interface
quality
assessment
service
ontologies
choice
service descriptions
user
profile
matchmaking

Figure 1: Concept of enhanced UDDI service registries
Distinguishing such query stereotypes like `book a table at the 
`Chez Panisse' for the 12/3/03 8:00 pm' and `give me the name 
and address of a Chinese restaurant in the commercial district of 
San Francisco with medium price range' and the subsequent personalization
of service provisioning also needs different types of 
input parameters. Whereas simple variables like the restaurant's 
name or a certain category in a clear request can be handled in an 
exact match fashion, more fuzzy attributes in a somewhat tentative
request like an approximate location or the choice of cuisine 
have to be understood as a user`s preferences with respect to certain
concepts (soft constraints). In the area of the Semantic Web 
the management of such concepts is usually done by the very 
powerful tool of ontologies that describe a generalization hierarchy
of such concepts. In the course of this paper we will show 
how to open up service provisioning to the better understanding, 
adequate handling and quality assessment of each individual 
user's intentions and preferences. The contribution of the paper 
thus is twofold:
·

On one hand we relate the use of ontologies and the handling 
of conceptual views like given by the Semantic Web to co-operatively
evaluating preferences for each specific user
·

On the other hand we show how to effectively deal with the 
problem of relaxing multiple conceptual views for more 
complex queries and give quality measures to assess the 
most useful results for each specific user.
Both contributions can be expected to improve the service provisioning
of user-centered Web services and help to boost their 
usability and thus subsequently their acceptance.
SEMANTIC REGISTRY ENHANCE-MENTS
Today Web services are usually provided via an Internet wide 
network of services registries given by the Universal Description 
Discovery<A href="193.html#10"> and Integration (UDDI) [21]. UDDI builds on the Web 
Service Definition Language WSDL<A href="193.html#10"> [7] which features basic 
information about providers of a service and technical service 
invocation details. Even though UDDI has become the de facto 
standard in the field it suffers from a major shortcoming: the information
offered on individual services is rather limited. A yellow
-page-style lookup mechanism provides the service interface 
together with a short verbal description of what task the service 
performs. Mainly targeted a human Web service experts and developers
, advanced query capabilities and cooperative matchmaking
, however, are still lacking.  
Research in the area of the Semantic Web seeks a solution to this 
unsatisfy<A href="193.html#10">ing situation, e.g. [20][4]<A href="193.html#9">. Generally speaking, the Semantic
Web fosters a population of the Web with content and 
services having formal semantics and rich service descriptions. 
Several semantic frameworks for Web services are currently 
emerging <A href="193.html#9">with DAML-S [2] and W3C's recently established 
<A href="193.html#10">OWL-S [9], [10] initiative as the most prominent approaches. We
have built our previous work on DAML-S as a relatively mature 
ontology-based approach to the description of Web services that 
tries to provide a common ontology of services for the Semantic 
<A href="193.html#10">Web. Building on top of DAML+OIL [8] the Web service representations
in DAML-S consist of a service profile for advertising 
and discovering services, a process model giving a detailed description
of a service's operation and a service grounding providing
details on how to interoperate with services via message exchange
. 
Figure 1 shows a schematic view of our semantically enriched 
Web service provisioning concept. A user states personal needs 
and preferences in an enhanced service request. The enhanced 
UDDI registry matches this request against the descriptions of all 
registered services. The actual matching can be carried out using 
cooperative database technology like sh<A href="193.html#9">own in [4]. The query is 
split in hard and soft constraints where the hard constraints are 
processed as filter conditions, whereas the soft conditions can be 
relaxed if necessary. If no user-specific preferences are given with 
the service request, the relaxation follows the domain-specific 
conceptual views of the service ontology given by the service 
providers or portal operators. To distinguish between several possible
relaxations the quality assessment, which is the main aspect 
of this paper, will evaluate the degree of match for each service 
with respect to the original user query and offer all best matches. 
After a certain implementation has been chosen, the service provider
will execute the service and deliver the result. 
From a service provisioning viewpoint centralized and publicly 
available service ontologies can be understood as a default service 
conceptualization or the most common service concept hierarchy, 
i.e. encoding common and widely accepted knowledge or 
world/domain knowledge. Due to the hierarchical nature of ontologies
a user asking for a specific service will also be served 
with any more specific service concept subsumed by his request. 
On the other hand, in the case where a best match to his initial 
request is not available he/she might also be satisfied with more 
general services from a super-class of the requested one. This is 
determined by a relaxation step in the service ontology, i.e. a 
generalization of concepts along the lines of the ontology.
ONTOLOGY-BASED WEB SERVICE DISCOVERY AND SELECTION
In this section we provide a brief overview of the use of ontologies
for relaxation of soft query constraints and show how common
knowledge serves as a default for cooperative retrieval.
197
American
California
Seafood
Shopping
Commercial
Cajun
Texmex
Organic
Fusion
Center
Suburb
City
Cultural
...
...
...
Location
Thing
Restaurant
Akasaka
Chez Panisse
Avocado Garden
Cesar
The Walrus
...
Se
rvi
c
e
s
S
e
rvi
c
e O
n
t
o
lo
gy
,,Cuisine"

Figure 2: Service Ontology for restaurant booking.
3.1

Service Ontologies, User Preferences and
Usage Patterns
The purpose of a service ontology is to describe the kinds of entities
available in a service repository and how they are related. To 
this end service ontologies may include descriptions of service 
classes, properties and their instances (the actual services that are 
eventually selected for execution). A basic service ontology is 
depicted in Figure 2. Here restaurant booking services are classified
according to their cuisine and their location in a city. For 
instance the restaurant `Chez Panisse' serves `Organic' food with 
`Organic' being a specialization of the `Californian' cuisine (as 
well as of `American'). Furthermore the restaurant `Chez Panisse' 
is located in the `Shopping' district which itself is part of the city 
`Center'. We have used W3C's Web Ontology Language (OWL) 
and its predecessor DAML+OIL to enrich DAML-S service pro-<A
href="193.html#9">files in Web service repositories [4][5]<A href="193.html#10">. Modeled in OWL the 
most general `Restaurant' and `Location' concepts are anchored 
in `owl:Thing' ­ the most common concept of any ontology.
A restaurant booking service using the service ontology from 
Figure 2 might on one hand assume that a user asking for `a restaurant
featuring American cuisine' will be well served by all 
restaurants with e.g. Cajun, Californian or Texmex cuisine, since 
they are all instantiations of American cuisines. On the other 
hand, if a user asks for `a Californian fusion cuisine restaurant' 
and no such service should be registered, implicitly relaxing the 
query to all Californian restaurants and offering restaurants with 
organic cuisine or Californian seafood to our user will be more 
helpful than just stating the empty result. And even if a user has 
different conceptions (e.g. cuisines being related based on their 
flavors) or explicit preferences (a Chinese restaurant rather than 
an Italian one), an ontology-based discovery/selection model is 
<A href="193.html#9">still useful. [4] shows in detail how to deal with these cases by 
overwriting the default ontology with an explicitly provided (or 
implicitily derived) generalization hierarchy of a user somewhat 
similar to the view definitions proposed by<A href="193.html#10"> [14]. Since for our 
assessment framework here the exact kind and classes/values of 
an ontology do matter less than its actual structure in each instance
, such overwritings by user specified conceptions are always
possible to facilitate.
We advocate the use of service ontologies together with a proprietary
notion of basic user preferences and typical service usage 
patterns for the stepwise refinement of service requests in a cooperative
service provisioning environment. While the basic approach
and combination of ontologies, preferences and patterns is 
<A href="193.html#10">published elsewhere [5] we will now concentrate on enhancements
to the relaxation along the lines of ontologies alone: unlike 
the specialization of a request, a generalization can result in severe
changes of the initial query semantics. This is especially true, 
if several relaxation steps have to be performed until a match can 
be found. At the point of relaxing a constraint to the root of an 
ontology, the respective constraint can even be considered as 
entirely dropped. But nevertheless, since an ontology resembles 
common knowledge (and thus implicit preferences), for high 
quality service provisioning offering somewhat related features is 
usually still a better default than just returning an empty result set.
3.2

Multiple Conceptual Views
Individual users might have quite specific ideas about differing 
domain concepts (conceptions) or very clear expectations how to 
be served differing from the usual domain assumptions (explicit 
preferences), but also implicit preferences play an important part. 
Consider for instance location-based services, e.g. for restaurant 
booking. If a user asks to book `a Chinese restaurant for dinner', 
the common domain knowledge tells us that this restaurant should 
be in the vicinity (e.g. a 30 miles area) of his current or usual 
whereabouts and we can add this information as an implicit constraint
for better provisioning quality. A user in San Francisco 
would usually be annoyed by offers of Chinese restaurants in 
Hong Kong no matter how good their actual quality or rating is. If 
this general assumption would not hold, however, (e.g. if a user 
wants to fly to Hong Kong in the morning and then have dinner 
there) he or she would have stated this unusual detail already 
within the query and had asked for a `Chinese restaurant in Hong 
Kong for dinner'. Such explicit information within a service request
is provided due to the psychological notion that though 
users want a service to know what is sensible (like they expect to 
be served in human-human interaction), no user expects a service 
to be clairvoyant. Thus, not only having further (explicit) knowledge
of a user, but also assuming typical behavior, concept hier-198
archies given by ontologies can be used as good default relaxation 
hierarchies for user preferences. Should, however, some preferences
or a specific conception be given, the underlying ontology 
has to be exchanged against the user-provided terms or concepts.
We introduce the notion of conceptual views on a service ontology
to account for all the different interests a user wants to express
in a service request. Such a conceptual view is modeled as a 
clipping from the full service ontology that starts with the most 
general concept associable with a specific user interest. For this 
paper we will for the ease of understanding assume conceptual 
views to be non-overlapping, tree-shaped clippings from the full 
service ontology where each service is registered with the node 
that describes its value with respect to the most specific characteristics
. An example conceptual view is indicated as a grey shaping 
in figure 2: the view named `Cuisine' is basically a sub-ontology 
only concerned with the classification of restaurants according to 
the offered type of food. Whereas the restaurants `The Walrus', 
`Chez Panisse', `Avocado Garden' and Cesar are classified as 
being `Fusion' or `Organic' places the restaurant `Akasaka' is not 
reachable in this view as it is only classified as located in the cultural
district. As we will discuss in the remainder of this paper 
multiple conceptual views can be used to account for different 
interests a user wants to express in a service request and the relative
importance between them. In the case of the restaurant booking
example it is conceivable that a user values the fulfillment of 
location constraints over cuisine constraints if he/she is only up 
for a quick work lunch. However, for the ambitious `hobby gour-met'
this might be just the other way round on the weekend. Thus 
we will need ways to assess the respective quality of different 
relaxation schemes to allow users to make an informed choice.
RELAXING MULTIPLE ONTOLOGIES
Let us now focus on problems that arise when multiple soft constraints
have to be relaxed over the service ontology. We will first 
look at our sample scenario, investigate the relaxation of conceptual
views and then discuss some quality considerations.
4.1

Relaxation Plans for Multiple Selection
Predicates
Let us consider our restaurant booking service from above. A 
typical query would be "Find a Californian fusion cuisine restaurant
in the commercial district of Berkeley". Here we will have to 
deal with two soft constraints: the type of cuisine and the location. 
Assuming that we do not have more specific information about 
the user's preferences both constraints could be relaxed along the 
two default conceptual views of the service ontology of figure 2.


`The Walrus'

fusion

`Cesar'





`Chez Panisse'
californian
organic

`Avocado Garden'


`Cucina Calabrese'




seafood

`The Mediterraneum'

Figure 3: The cuisine ontology with respective instances
Figures 3 and 4 show the full first two concept levels of the respective
conceptual views with some instances. So in figure 3 we 
can for instance see that there is a service for a restaurant called 
`The Walrus' which is classified as offering fusion cuisine and as 
such, also offering Californian cuisine. The relaxation of query 
predicates over such a view is straightforward. If the query predicate
specifies `fusion cuisine' restaurants, we would have the 
choice between the respective instances, here `The Walrus' and 
`Cesar'. If for some reason there would be no fusion cuisine restaurants
registered, or the instances cannot satisfy some other 
constraints (like booking for a certain date), we will relax along 
the ontology to the more general concept of Californian cuisine 
and can also consider the restaurants that are registered under the 
`organic' and `seafood' characterizations of California cuisine.
The technical problem of how to relax single conceptual views 
with adequate query languages over cooperative database systems 
<A href="193.html#9">is in detail addressed e.g. in [4] and [5]<A href="193.html#10">. The beauty of the design 
is that all details of a UDDI or DAML-S style description for each 
service together with some more characteristics (e.g. taken from 
RDF statements of a restaurants homepage) can be stored in a 
classic relational database by the service provider and can be 
searched using a declarative query language extended by preference
constructors like sh<A href="193.html#10">own in e.g. [13]. Thus an added-value 
service using semantically meaningful content can be provided 
quite easily.


`Tom's Grill'

commercial
`Sushi and Soul'


`Avocado Garden'



city center    cultural

`The Mediterraneum'


`Akasaka'





`Chez Panisse'

shopping

`Cesar'


`Pizza My Heart'

Figure 4: The location ontology with respective instances
A more serious problem arises when several soft query constraints 
over various conceptual views have to be evaluated. Consider for 
instance the query on a `fusion cuisine restaurant in the commercial
district'. We can easily verify that in our example even 
though `The Walrus' and `Cesar' are fusion cuisine, they are not 
registered in the commercial district. Likewise `Tom's Grill', 
`Sushi and Soul' and `Avocado Garden' are in the commercial 
district, but they do not offer fusion cuisine. Aiming at a cooperative
retrieval behavior we are left with three choices: relaxing the 
constraint on the cuisine, relaxing the constraint on the location or 
relaxing both constraints. When relaxing the cuisine to `califor-nian'
we would retrieve the service of `Avocado Garden' the only 
Californian cuisine restaurant within the commercial district. Relaxing
the location-based ontology would result only in the service
of `Cesar' the only fusion cuisine restaurant in the city center
. Finally relaxing both constraints would result in all Californian
cuisine restaurant within the city center, i.e. `Avocado Garden'
, `The Mediterraneum', `Chez Panisse' and `Cesar'. Thus
199
different kinds of relaxation will usually result in essentially differing
answer sets. This problem will remain if more relaxation 
steps have to be taken. If we have relaxed only one constraint we 
could e.g. decide to relax this property even further or relax another
property of our service during the next step. Let us first 
define the task of finding the `best' service under relaxation
The Problem of Best-Matching Service Provisioning:    
Given various characteristics that describe all services in a service 
ontology, a concept hierarchy (conceptual view) for each characteristic
and a user request stating a number of hard and soft constraints
, the best-matching service is given by all services that:  
- fulfill all the hard constraints

- fulfill all soft constraints with a minimum amount of relaxation 
of characteristics with respect to a suitable quality measure
So given that each service is registered in one concept node for 
each characteristic given by the respective conceptual view, and 
all services not fulfilling the hard constraints have been filtered, 
the problem of selection over multiple constraints comes down to 
deciding what is `a minimum amount of relaxation'. Obviously 
the basic task is finding a service that is registered with all concepts
(or any of their respective sub-concepts) as specified by the 
query, a `perfect match'. But if there is no such service registered, 
the decision what soft constraints to relax and how far they are 
relaxed, is paramount for the quality of provisioning.
4.2

Basic Service Quality Considerations
Since the decision about the relaxation scheme is important for 
the output, some way of considering which scheme to follow is 
needed. Usually ontologies are of a qualitative nature. A superclass
/ subclass taxonomy is established, but there is no knowledge
of the `degree' or the relative distance between different 
concepts. However, such knowledge could crucially change the 
utility of certain relaxation plans. Relaxing more refined ontologies
or views will generally hurt the user preferences less than 
relaxing already coarse views or ontologies. The less general the 
concept, the more refined are the sets of objects that will be offered
to the user, and flooding the user with too much too general 
content is avoided. Let us first take a closer look at merely qualitative
views on ontologies of comparable granularity, etc. (i.e. 
relaxing one constraint is introducing the same amount of generalization
as relaxing any other) and then investigate ways to deal 
with quantitative measures in the following section.
For scenarios of merely qualitative preferences and their relaxation
for the restricted class of ceteris paribus preferences <A href="193.html#10">[16] 
proposes a scheme of ordering different objects in the result set 
according to the count of necessary relaxation steps from the top 
or the bottom of the hierarchy or simply the relative distance to all 
violated query constraints. Since we assumed symmetrical views 
on ontologies, also in our relaxation problem a similar concept 
will help us to understand what should be relaxed preferably and 
what this means for the objects in the result set. Let us first show 
the approach of simply counting the relaxation steps from the 
violated constraints. We will label the services we found in each 
step by the number of necessary steps to find them. But first we 
need to define the necessary concept of relaxation paths.
Given tree-shaped conceptual views of a service ontology that 
arranges concepts or values with respect to certain service characteristics
using a generalization semantics, a relaxation path is a 
path along the edges of each conceptual view that leads from a 
base concept to the respective root of the view. Usually this base
concept is specified in a service request or user query and relaxing 
along the relaxation path leads to an increasing generalization of 
this concept. Assuming that all services have been assigned to the 
node of their first appearance along the relaxation path (i.e. they 
are registered to any of the respective node's sub-trees of concepts
, but not to an earlier node of the relaxation path) we get a 
chain of concepts with all services registered under the aspect of 
least necessary level of generalization.
An example for a relaxation path can be easily derived from figures
2 and 4. If a user is primarily interested in the commercial 
district, the appropriate nodes of the relaxation path would be 
`commercial district', `city center', `city' and `location'. The 
services registered in the nodes are e.g. `Tom's Grill', `Sushi and 
Soul' and `Avocado Garden' for `commercial district'. The node 
`city center' would also contain all services registered to its sub-concepts
, (i.e. `The Mediterraneum', `Akasaka', `Chez Panisse', 
`Cesar' and `Pizza My Heart') and so on. Figure 5 shows the first 
two steps of respective relaxation paths for both conceptual views 
in figures 3 and 4 focusing only on the services registered in both 
views. As we pointed out we will always assume tree-shape views 
for the course of this paper. Please note that all the concepts easily
can be transferred to the case where sub-concepts can have 
multiple parent nodes. In this case the node along the relaxation 
path would consist of the intersection of the different parent concepts
, or the intersection of their registered services respectively. 
This generalization has already been successfully employed in a 
similar fashion for mapping queries between differing ontologies 
by<A href="193.html#10"> [18]. Distances then can simply be measured by the minimum 
distance, if multiple paths for relaxation should be available.
Let us now see, how relaxation can be done using an unlabeled 
relaxation graph (see figures 3 and 4). If we begin by either relaxing
the cuisine or the location constraint of our query we would 
have to assign a quality value of 1 to both the `Avocado Garden' 
and `Cesar'. Thus in terms of quality they are incomparable, 
which closely resembles our missing knowledge of what kind of 
relaxation the individual user would prefer. If there should be 
more ways to relax constraints to encounter a service, we will 
always count the minimum number of relaxation steps necessary. 
Relaxing both constraints again leads to quality values of 1 for 
`Avocado Garden' and `Cesar' and a value of 2 for `The Mediterraneum'
and `Chez Panisse', because they have only been seen by 
relaxing both constraints and thus are probably less desirable for 
the user. However, relaxing the cuisine ontology two steps (i.e. to 
all American cuisines) and sticking to the commercial center constraint
might result in `Tom's Grill' turning up also with a value 
of 2. This is because in the naïve model the semantic difference 
between `deep' relaxation and `broad' relaxation is considered the 
same. To be sensitive to the differing implications of broad and 
deep relaxation with respect to generality we will use our concept 
of relaxation paths and show how to use labels along this path to 
get to a more sophisticated relaxation paradigm.
fusion
californian
american
city center
commercial
city
1
2
1
2
fusion
californian
american
city center
commercial
city
1
2
1
2
Avocado Garden
Tom`s Grill
Cesar
Cesar
Avocado Garden
Tom`s Grill
Chez Panisse
Mediterraneum
Chez Panisse
Mediterraneum

Figure 5: Relaxation paths and assigned services
200
Usually the generalization throughout ontologies will become 
quickly rather unspecific with decreasing distance to the root. 
Hence a broad relaxation strategy (breadth first relaxation) often 
is preferred to deep relaxation steps. Summing up the distances 
like before, but weighing each relaxation step with the relative 
distance to the original query term can implement this. Consider 
our query for `fusion cuisine' restaurants in the `commercial district'
. So for example the `Avocado Garden' and `Cesar' need 
each only one relaxation step with a distance of one to the original 
constraint (cf. labels in figure 5), so their quality value is 1. `Chez 
Panisse' and `The Mediterraneum' both need two relaxation steps 
with a distance of 1 each resulting in a value of 2. In contrast 
`Tom's Grill' also needs only two relaxation steps, but whereas 
the first step has a distance of 1, the second step already shows a 
distance of 2. Thus the final value for `Tom's Grill' is 3 (i.e. 
1+2*1) and we can now effectively distinguish between deep and 
broad relaxation. Depending on the nature and granularities of the 
ontology or views we can of course also use higher weightings for 
the deep relaxations, for instance 10
(distance-1)
. So the first step will
be weighted by 1, the second deep step by 10, the third deep step 
by 100, and so on. Since the broad relaxation steps are still simply 
added up, this will `punish' deep relaxation and avoid too broad 
generalizations of constraints. If we always want to punish deep 
steps symmetrically until all constraints in turn are relaxed at least 
to the same level a factor of (number_of_ontologies)
(distance-1)
will
be adequate as shown in the following lemma.
Lemma 1: Weightings to Foster Broad Ontology Relaxation 
Given  n soft query constraints with their respective relaxation 
hierarchies. To always prefer a broad relaxation scheme, label 
each object by summing up the numbers of edges relaxed to find 
this object in each hierarchy and weigh every edge by n
(d ­1)
using
the number of soft constraints n and the relative distance d to the 
original query constraint.
Proof: Since within each depth all weightings are the same, it is 
obvious that within a certain depth of the hierarchy any object 
seen with less relaxation steps has a smaller label than an object 
that needs more steps. Thus if we e.g. have to relax two constraints
within a level this object will always be labeled with a 
higher weight than an object that needed only one relaxation independently
of which constraints have been relaxed.
We still have to show that if we do a step with a deeper distance, 
an object O encountered there always gets a higher label than any 
object P encountered in all hierarchies only with relaxations up to 
a lower distance. We will do that by showing that the minimum 
label for object O is higher than the maximum label for object P. 
Let us assume that in order to encounter object O we have to relax 
at least one constraint to a distance of k. The minimum label for O 
thus is given by relaxing only a single constraint to distance k and 
not having to relax any other constraint. Hence object O's label is 
given by (n
0
+n
1
+...+n
(k-2)
+n
(k-1)
). The maximum possible label for
object P on the other hand is given by having to relax every of the 
n constraints (k-1)-times, i.e. the maximum distance smaller than 
k. Thus the maximum label for P is n*(n
0
+n
1
+...+n
(k-2)
) =
(n
1
+...+n
(k-2)
+n
(k-1)
) and thus P's label is -even relaxing all constraints
to a maximum- at least by 1 smaller than the best possible 
label for O.
Thus in relaxing constraints for equally important conceptual 
views an adequate algorithm would be the processing of decreasing
levels of quality, i.e. finding services with increasing weightings
. Starting with the minimum possible relaxation the algorithm
will always work over an entire sequence of services with the 
same quality index and return all the discovered services of the 
lowest level found, together with their quality estimation. This is 
important for having to restart the algorithm at the previous point 
of termination, if the services discovered so far should not have 
been sufficient and the evaluation of lesser quality levels becomes 
necessary. Similarly, knowing the labeling technique and the 
views involved a user can also specify a maximum quality value 
up to which he/she is willing to accept more general services. For 
our algorithm we will assume a declarative query mechanism on 
UDDI directories enhanced by all the feature characteristics described
by their respective conceptual views like pres<A href="193.html#9">ented in [4].
However, symmetrically relaxing just the same number of steps 
even when assuming views of the same granularity and importance
with respect to the user query, will generally not lead to our 
desired broad relaxation scheme with as little generalization as 
possible. Imagine a query that specifies two soft predicates of 
which one is a leaf node of a view, whereas the other predicate 
specifies a direct descendant node of the root in the respective 
view. If no perfect match should be given, our strategy would 
result in relaxing either of the two constraints a single step. But 
whereas the relaxation by a single step from our leaf node usually 
leads to a slight generalization allowing a few more services for 
selection, the relaxation step in our second constraint would relax 
to the root node and thus offer the total number of services registered
in the entire ontology for the respective characteristic, i.e. 
entirely drop the second constraint. Obviously that would not be a 
sensible behavior. So we do not only have to punish deep relaxation
steps but even more severely refrain from relaxations the 
closer we are to the root.
This concept will be implemented in our relaxation algorithm by 
letting the longest possible relaxation path determine the weightings
for all constraints (again assuming a comparable level of 
detail throughout our ontology). The weightings for edges along 
the relaxation path will then be assigned in each conceptual view 
in descending order starting from the root down to the concept 
specified by the query. Thus the relaxation of all concepts at least 
to the same level of generalization is enforced before having to 
relax already more general concepts. In our example from above 
the relaxation path for a leaf node concept would be assigned 
weightings as given by the height of the conceptual view, whereas 
the relaxation path for a concept node right below the root would 
be assigned the highest possible weighting. Thus (following 
lemma 1), our leaf node concept will have been relaxed to a generalization
level of the respective concept right below the root 
before the second constraint is relaxed for the first time. Now we 
are ready to present an algorithm for relaxation of symmetrical 
constraints incorporation a breadth first paradigm and a minimum 
level of generalization strategy.
Algorithm: Symmetrical Constraints Breadth First Paradigm
1.

Pose the query containing only the hard constraints against 
the enhanced UDDI / DAML-S directory.
1.1.

If an empty result should be returned, terminate the algorithm
outputting the empty result set.
1.2.

Repose the query with all soft constraints included.
1.3.

If a non-empty result should be returned for the expanded
query, terminate the algorithm and output the 
respective services as perfect matches with a relaxation 
level of 0.
201
2.

Given n the number of soft constraints we have to label each 
edge along the relaxation path from the concept specified by 
the query to the root node in every conceptual view (cf. 
lemma 1).
2.1.

Among the n views find the longest possible relaxation 
path and set maxdepth as the maximum depth of all ontologies
relative to the class specified in the service request
2.2.

For every view label the relaxation path starting from 
the root by n
d
down to the concept specified by the
query (d := (maxdepth ­1) to 0 descending)
3.

For i = 1 to
n
j
(1
j  maxdepth)
3.1.

Start with the query including all hard and soft constraints
and build statements containing any possible 
relaxation with a weighting of i, i.e. relax in turn all 
conceptual views by one step up to the point of reaching
the desired weighting. Due to construction of the 
weighting this will result in a breadth first strategy.
3.2.

If any of the statements produced in 3.1. retrieves a 
non-empty result set, collect results of all possibilities 
and terminate the algorithm.
In this algorithm step 3 can efficiently be implemented using an 
A*-Algorithm that successively explores the differently weighted 
tree edges finding all possible combinations for each quality 
weighting. However, please note that not every weighting is possible
to reach by relaxing constraints.
We will now exemplify the above algorithm through different 
examples: consider the three conceptual views X, Y and Z given 
in figure 6 and assume a user has posed a query requesting the 
characteristics X3, Y2 and Z6 as soft constraints. Let us assume 
all hard filter conditions have already been satisfied, but the basic 
query for our soft constraints fails, i.e. no service with these capabilities
is registered. Step two of our algorithm will now label the 
relaxation paths like shown in figure 6 (bold edges and shaded 
vertexes). Starting with all services having quality values of one, 
concept Z6 is generalized to Z3 and the query is reposed with 
constraints X3, Y2 and Z3. If we still should have no matching 
services we have to go on relaxing. A query for a value of two is 
not possible, but for a value of 3 we can relax X3 to X2 and repose
the query with constraints X2, Y2 and Z3. Let us assume we 
still have not found a result the next quality value would be 4. For 
this we have two possibilities and have to unite the results of the 
query on X2, Y2, Z3 and the query X3, Y2, Z2. The next possible 
quality value would be 7 with a query on X2, Y2, Z2. Please note 
that we indeed have relaxed all constraints to same level until we 
relax any constraint to the top level (e.g. in the view Y) for the 
first time. The algorithm would terminate at the latest after relaxing
all views to the top level with a quality value of 34.
Z2
Z1
Z4
Y5
Y4
Y3
X1
X4
X5
X6
Z6
1
9
3
9
3
9
X3
X2
Y2
Z3
Y1

Figure 6: Conceptual views with labeled relaxation paths
4.3

Quantitative Service Quality Measures
In the last section we have seen an effective scheme for the case 
of symmetrical relaxations under the assumption of equal useful-ness
, i.e. one broad step was as useful as any other broad step of a 
comparable level. But in real world applications query constraints 
are not always only of a qualitative, incomparable nature. Deeper 
knowledge of individual user's preferences or knowledge of 
stereotypical usage can become interesting parameters in assessing
the quality of different relaxation schemes. Tuning the factor 
to a certain ratio for each application (x broad steps equal 1 deep 
step) will express the desired semantics in each instance. The 
exact coefficient used for the discrimination of deep relaxation in 
each instance, however, will typically strongly depend on the 
domain, the total number of soft query constraints and the respective
granularity of the views / ontology (i.e. the semantic level of 
detail) used. Views that are modeled with a very fine granularity 
can be relaxed introducing a smaller degree of generalization to 
the service request results than would be introduced by those 
views that are modeled rather coarsely anyway. Hence, a deep 
relaxation step in a very detailed ontology might be worth only 
three or four broad relaxations of other user constraints, whereas a 
deep step in a coarser ontology used within the same query might 
add up to the worth of ten broad relaxation steps or even several 
deep relaxation steps of other constraints. Likewise very flat hierarchies
with many subclasses to each node are not suited too well 
for deep relaxation. So the discrimination will in each application 
depend on:
·

The relative semantic importance of a view with respect
to the user request
·

The maximum depth of each conceptual view,
·

Its total number of (sub-) concepts and
·

The (average) number of instances in each concept.
The relative semantic importance of a view can usually only be 
determined by directly consulting the user. But in the following 
we will give an overview of techniques that will generally help to 
deal with problems of relaxing views with different granularities. 
As a rule of thumb we can state that the relaxation of views having
a low maximum depth and rather high numbers of services 
attached to each node should be delayed as long as possible. Our 
technique of starting the view graph labeling from the root node 
already helps facilitating this rule. If a shallow conceptual view is 
used (usually an indication for coarse modeling) together with a 
more detailed view, even the edges to leaf nodes in the shallow 
ontology will be assigned rather high weightings unlike the leaf 
nodes in ontologies with a rather high depth. This behavior is, 
however, not always the best choice. If unlike in figure 6 the respective
depths of conceptual views differ by a considerable 
amount, we should not simply delay the relaxation of shallow 
views, but have to insert several intermediate steps in the more 
detailed views before relaxing the next step in a coarse view. 
Figure 7 shows pairs of views X, Y and X', Y'. In both cases the 
depth of X, X' is only two whereas the depth of Y, Y' is four. 
That means that in terms of relaxation we can assume that for 
some reason the more shallow ontologies X and X' are modeled 
rather coarsely. On the left hand side in figure 7 we can see the 
labeling scheme from our algorithm. Ontology Y would be relaxed
to Y3 or even Y2 before a single step in X would be relaxed
. On the right hand side we can see a better labeling scheme 
with interleaved relaxation steps (two steps in Y' for a step in X').
202
Y5
8
4
1
8
4
2
Y´5
12
3
1
8
4
2
Y4
Y2
Y3
Y1
Y´4
Y´2
Y´3
Y´1
X´1
X´2
X´3
X1
X2
X3

Figure 7: Differently labeled relaxation paths
Since the interleaving of relaxation steps with respect to the 
maximum depth generally seems a fairer approach, we will incorporate
this behavior into our algorithm. If the maximum depth of 
some conceptual views should severely differ, we will assume a 
coarser level of detail and find out how many steps in the most 
detailed view represent a single step in the coarser view. We then 
re-label the coarse view beginning from the root by adding so 
many of the appropriate sequence of weightings, as steps in the 
detailed view are necessary. For instance in figure 7 we can easily 
see that a single step in X (depth 2) represents two steps in Y 
(depth 4) and thus we would have to re-label the first edge by the 
sum of the two highest weights of Y (8+4) and its second edge by 
the sum of the next two weights (2+1). Following this scheme we 
can gain the more suitable relaxation weights of view X'. In terms 
of our quality assessment algorithm that means that we have to 
reconsider the labeling of the relaxation paths in step two and 
replace the respective section by the following:
2.1. Among the n conceptual views find the longest possible 
relaxation path multiplying possible steps in each view relative
to the class specified in the service request by the view's 
respective factor of q, where q is given as the integer part of 
the result of dividing the maximum view depth by the maximum
depth of the current view (i.e. q steps in the most detailed
view represent one step in this view). Set the maximum
value for maxdepth.
2.2. For every conceptual view label the relaxation path 
starting from the root by n
d
+ n
d-1
+...+ n
d-q+1
(i.e. the sum of
the first q weights in terms of the most detailed relaxation 
path) down to n
d
+ n
d-1
+...+ n
0
with d:= (maxdepth ­1).
A second possibility to control the relaxation properties of multiple
conceptual views is the incorporation of user preferences giving
a preferred relaxation order. Incorporating such preferences 
into the weights along the ontology, however, is a very difficult 
problem in its own rights and therefore beyond the scope of this 
paper. For the case that a simple ordering of relaxation for the 
views is given by the user, we can use double-labeled relaxation 
paths like <A href="193.html#9">for the tree patterns in [1]. The second label for each 
node is e.g. the respective rank of the view in a specified relaxation
ordering or the number of the node's respective sub-concepts. 
In the case that for the execution of step 3 in our algorithm more 
than one query should be possible, the relaxations can then be 
executed minimizing the sum of second labels and retrieval can 
be terminated whenever a result occurs. Also for the case that a 
prioritization of relaxations is give<A href="193.html#10">n (cf. [13]), the respective relaxation
scheme is straightforward: The prioritized view is successively
relaxed until a first result set is retrieved. Then the second
, third, etc. views are used to break ties. However, when it 
comes to integrating weights from preferences into relaxation 
weights deeper research is still needed.
RELATED WORK
While in the above discussions we assumed the existence of different
conceptual views to a given ontology, the actual creation of 
these views is beyond the scope of this paper. Multiple views as 
abstractions of data sources are a well understand concept in classical
databases systems. Yet the concept of such views has only 
recently been addressed in the context of the Semantic Web 
through the proposal of the view definition language RVL for the 
low level ontology<A href="193.html#10"> language RDFS [14]. RVL uses a declarative 
query language for the creation of virtual schemas which in turn 
serve as views on existing complex ontologies. Please note that 
although we merely focused on tree-shaped clippings from OWL 
ontologies as simple relaxation hierarchies in our examples, the 
presented concepts are general enough to be used with only the 
slightest adaptations together with other types of ontologies and 
more complex views, e.g. virtual RVL views.
Choosing the `right' Web service for execution has been considered
in several ways. For legal or economical points of view especially
assurance structures guaranteeing that a service performs 
<A href="193.html#10">the desired task like [11] or [17] have been addressed. However, 
when negotiating about execution guarantees or costs the semantic
content of a service has to be understood and its specific capabilities
have already to be agreed on. Taking a more user-centered 
view the notion of services' reputation for subsequent selection 
<A href="193.html#10">[15] or the quality assessment for the negotiation of service level 
agreements<A href="193.html#9"> [3] have been proposed. However, these approaches 
focus on conceptual designs omitting algorithms how to assess the 
quality in each instance. The most complete framework with respect
to heterogeneous environments featuring multiple ontologies
is given by<A href="193.html#10"> [18] where the notion of information loss for 
query reformulation is defined. Unlike our work presented here, 
where multiple conceptual views of a service ontology occur in a 
single request, this work, however, deals with the loss of information
when a query has to be translated from one into another ontology
(e.g. in order to pose it to a different data source). Thus it 
is rather concerned with the problem of ontology mappings.
The area of service request relaxation over ontologies also shows 
some similarities with database query relaxation frameworks like 
given <A href="193.html#10">in [6] or [13] and especially recent work on querying semi-structured
data like in XML databases. In the case of XML the 
DTD of a document defines its structure together with the (semantic
) type of data within each node. The main focus of querying in 
that area is on building queries without perfect knowledge of 
documents structure or the exact data it contains. Exploiting the 
set of labels given by a XML document's DTD as ontology in 
<A href="193.html#10">term of the documents' structure [12] uses the result sets of queries
to define the semantic equivalence of alternative query expressions
, however without relaxing concepts within queries. The 
area of relaxation for tree-shaped queries not only on a structural 
level (`relax to any descendant node instead of child node'), but 
also on a limited semantic level (`find author of document instead 
of book') is in <A href="193.html#9">detail addressed in [1]. Here also weightings along 
the edges of trees comparable to our user preference-driven quality
assessments in section 4.3 are discussed. Our work differs 
mainly in that we can rely on fine-granular concept ontologies 
that are custom made by domain experts and used in central service
provisioning portals or UDDI / DAML-S directories. Not 
only are we able to exploit semantics by a far larger extent than 
previous work, but we also provide means to derive sensible 
weightings for edges within conceptual views based on general 
user preferences and a fair relaxation paradigm.
203
The general area of enhancement of UDDI goes back to describing
the capabilities of Web services on a more detailed level by 
using ontology languages <A href="193.html#10">like DAML+OIL [8]. An example for 
the efficient mapping of DAML+OIL capability descriptions onto 
<A href="193.html#10">UDDI records is given in [20]. Our approach for result quality 
assessment here is facilitated by the database-based approach for 
UDDI <A href="193.html#9">enhancement featured in [4]. Using cooperative database 
technology and an extended declarative query language like the 
one <A href="193.html#10">given in [13] this framework features a good implementation 
framework for our quality assessment. Queries using hard and soft 
constraints can be automatically rewritten using the relaxed concepts
and posed against a database of service descriptions using 
suitable relaxation ontologies. However, in terms of quality these 
languages feature only a qualitative result set under the notion of 
Pareto-optimality. Quantitative quality constraints that limit the 
flood of incomparable results delivered by the exponential growth 
of Pareto sets with the number of soft constraints in the request 
are not considered. A first study of such quality measures is given 
<A href="193.html#10">in [16] for the restricted class of ceteris paribus preferences like 
discussed in section 4.2.
SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK
In this paper we presented a framework for the discovery and 
selection of Web Services based on personalized quality assessments
for individual service users. Starting with a set of conceptual
views over a service ontology that express a generalization 
hierarchy of concepts (conceptual views) for different services' 
capabilities and characteristics, we proposed to enhance today's 
UDDI / DAML-S registries by a matching component that will 
not only perform a filtering of services according to user specified 
terms, but also allows for cooperative matchmaking between service
descriptions and the individual user's preferences. Focusing 
on the quality assessment component of such an enhancement we 
described in detail how to deal with different kinds and multiple 
instances of conceptual views. The views in our framework contain
the domain-specific understanding of concepts or the common
knowledge that users typically will expect when trying to 
find an adequate service for execution. If no service that offers all 
required capabilities can be found, relaxing along these views will 
step by step generalize the services' requested features until a best 
possible match can be found. Thus cooperative behavior can be 
introduced for improved service provisioning.
We focused on controlling these relaxation steps implementing a 
breadth first strategy control flow to delay far-reaching generalizations
for as long as possible. We also discussed the influence of 
relaxation plans for various views, which may differ in their 
granularity or accuracy of discrimination and the influence of 
individual user preferences for relaxation orders. For the case of 
views with differing level of details we gave an adequate scheme 
to balance the control flow. Nevertheless, the exact instantiation 
of the views and the adequate weightings chosen still will usually 
differ between application areas. Anticipating stereotype interaction
patterns or experiences of past interactions, however, the 
service provider usually is able to also provide some suitable default
ontologies for cooperative matchmaking within UDDI / 
DAML-S registries or managed service portals. In any case the 
provisioning of suitable facilities for the assessment of Web service
quality can be expected to become a central part of service 
provisioning and will essentially influence the future acceptance 
of Web service offers by individual clients.
In this paper we have restricted conceptual views to tree-shaped 
clippings of ontologies with view elements being exclusively 
related through `is-a' relationships (stating an explicit generalization
of concepts in a superclass/subclass fashion). Of course also 
other relationships within ontologies might be available for relaxation
tasks in service requests; on the other hand their semantic 
meaning will usually be somewhat more difficult. Since complex 
ontologies commonly contain named relationships between entities
that might be used to make views more flexible and query 
relaxation more meaningful, an important future work item will 
be to break down this restriction on relationships of the `is-a' 
type. With our algorithms' focus on relaxation paths as an abstraction
of the underlying views, our general framework for quality
assessment can be expected to be extensible also to these new 
types of views in a straightforward manner independently of the 
exact type of view the relaxation path was derived from. If a relaxation
of a constraint along a certain relationship is backed by 
sensible relaxation semantics (i.e. is meaningful), however, has to 
be checked in each individual instance.
Furthermore, our future work will focus on a tighter integration of 
individual user preferences into the quality assessment process 
like addressed in section 4.3. Choosing the adequate weightings 
does not have an obvious semantics. The meaning of `relaxing 
one constraint is two-times better than relaxing another constraint' 
can only be guessed, what about three-times, etc.? The area between
quantitative quality assessments like e.g. re-weighting techniques
or relevance feedback as known from the area of IR, and 
the purely qualitative approaches like Pareto optimality of solu-<A
href="193.html#10">tions like given in [13] offers a vast variety of possibilities to 
explore for real world applications. Also here the notion of stereotypical
usage of services and the grouping of users with similar 
intensions might lead to improved service provisioning. We believe
that using and extending our framework is a vital step towards
getting a better understanding of these topics. In any case 
assessing quality of service request results in a semantically sensible
way promises to pave the road to cooperative provisioning 
for user-centered services.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Achim Leubner and Anthony Tarlano for 
helpful comments and suggestions. This work was partially 
funded by an Emmy-Noether-Grant of the German Research 
Foundation (DFG).

REFERENCES
[1]

S. Amer-Yahia, S. Cho, D. Srivastava. Tree Pattern Relaxation
. In Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Extending Database Technology
(EDBT'02), Prague, Czech Republic, 2002.
[2]

A. Ankolenkar, M. Burstein, J. Hobbs, et. al. DAML-S: Web 
Service Description for the Semantic Web. In Proc. of the 
Int. Semantic Web Conf. (ISWC'02), Sardinia, Italy, LNCS 
2342, Springer, 2002.
[3]

W.-T. Balke, A. Badii. Assessing Web Services Quality for 
Call-by-Call Outsourcing. In Proc. of the Int Workshop on 
Web Services Quality (WQW'03), Rome, Italy, 2003.
[4]

W.-T. Balke, M. Wagner. Cooperative Discovery for User-centered
Web Service Provisioning. In Proceedings of the 
First International Conference on Web Services (ICWS'03), 
Las Vegas, USA, 2003.
204
[5]

W.-T. Balke, M. Wagner. Towards Personalized Selection of 
Web Services. In Proceedings of the 12th International 
World Wide Web Conference (WWW 2003) Alternate Track 
on Web Services, Budapest, Hungary, 2003.
[6]

S. Chaudhuri. Generalization and a Framework for Query 
Modification. In Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Data Engineering 
(ICDE'90), Los Angeles, USA, 1990.
[7]

E. Christensen, F. Curbera, G. Meredith, S. Weerawarana. 
Web Services Description Language (WSDL) 1.1.

http://www.w3.org/TR/2001/NOTE-wsdl-20010315, 2001.
[8]

D. Connolly et al. DAML+OIL Reference Description. W3C 
Note, December 2001.
[9]

DAML. OWL-S: Semantic Markup for Web Services.  
http://www.daml.org/services/owl-s/1.0/owl-s.html#foot29
[10]

DAML. OWL-S 1.0 Release.

http://www.daml.org/services/owl-s/1.0/
[11]

M. Jakobsson, M. Yung. On Assurance Structures for WWW 
Commerce. In Proc. of Int. Conf. on Financial Cryptography 
(FC'98), Springer LNCS 1465, Anguilla, British West Indies, 
1998
[12]

Y. Kanza, Y. Sagiv. Flexible Queries over Semistructured 
Data. In Proc. of the ACM Symp. on Principles of Database 
Systems (PODS'02), Santa Barbara, USA, 2001.
[13]

W. Kießling, G. Köstler. Preference SQL - Design, Imple-mentation
, Experiences. In Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Very 
Large Databases (VLDB'02), Hong Kong, China, 2002.
[14]

A. Magkanaraki, V. Tannen, V. Christophides, D. 
Plexousakis. Viewing the Semantic Web Through RVL 
Lenses. In Proc. of the Int. Semantic Web Conf. (ISWC'03), 
LNCS 2870, Sanibel Island, USA, 2003.
[15]

E. M. Maximilien, M.Singh. Conceptual Model of Web Service
Reputation. In SIGMOD Records 31(4), 2002.
[16]

M. McGeachie, J. Doyle. Efficient Utility Functions for Ce-teris
Paribus Preferences. In Proc. of Conf. on Artificial Intelligence
and Conf. on Innovative Applications of Artificial 
Intelligence (AAAI/IAAI'02), Edmonton, Canada, 2002.
[17]

G. Medvinsky, C. Lai, B. Neuman. Endorsements, Licensing
, and Insurance for Distributed System Services. In Proc. 
of the ACM Conf. on Computer and Communications Security
, Fairfax, USA, 1994
[18]

E. Mena, V. Kashyap, A. Illarramendi, A. Sheth. Imprecise 
Answers in Distributed Environments: Estimation of Information
Loss for Multi-Ontology based Query Processing. In 
International Journal of Cooperative Information Systems 
(IJCIS), 9 (4), 2000.
[19]

NTT DoCoMo home page.

http://www.nttdocomo.com/home.html, 2003.
[20]

M. Paolucci, T. Kawamura, T. Payne, K. Sycara. Importing 
the Semantic Web in UDDI. In Proc. of the Int. Workshop on 
Web Services, e-Business and the Semantic Web (WES'02), 
Toronto, Canada, 2002
[21]

UDDI. The UDDI Technical White Paper.   
http://www.uddi.org.

205
