Handoff Trigger Table for Integrated 3G/WLAN Networks
ABSTRACT
Vertical handoff is a switching process between heterogeneous
wireless networks in a hybrid 3G/WLAN network.
Vertical handoffs fromWLAN to 3G network often fail due
to the abrupt degrade of the WLAN signal strength in the
transition areas. In this paper, a Handoff Trigger Table is
introduced to improve the performance of vertical handoff.
Based on this table, a proactive handoff scheme is proposed.
Simulation results show that with the proposed scheme, the
vertical handoff decisions will be more efficient so that dropping
probability can be decreased dramatically.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
C.4 [Performance of Systems]: Design Studies; C.2.1
[Network Architecture and Design]: Wireless Communications
--Integrated 3G/WLAN Networks
General Terms
Performance

INTRODUCTION
With the emergence of different wireless technologies, which
are developed for different purposes, the integration of these
wireless networks has attracted much attention from both
academia and industry. Among them, the integration of 3G
cellular networks and wireless local access networks (WLAN)
has become a very active area in the development toward the
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
IWCMC'06, July 3­6, 2006, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
Copyright 2006 ACM 1-59593-306-9/06/0007 ...
$
5.00.
next generation wireless networks. WLAN access technology
can offer high-speed data connections in a small coverage
with relatively low cost. On the other hand, cellular
networks can offer connectivity over several square kilometers
but with relatively low data rate. Taking advantages
of both networks will bring great benefits to both service
providers and users.
One of the desired features of such a heterogeneous wireless
network is to support seamless global roaming or vertical
handoff. Traditionally, handoff is performed within the
same wireless system, which is called horizontal handoff.
In contrast, a vertical handoff takes place between different
wireless networks [2]. In an integrated 3G/WLAN network
, there are two directions in vertical handoff, one is from
WLANs to 3G networks and the other is from3G Networks
to WLANs. In the first direction, the objective for handoff
is to maintain the connectivity, i.e., switching to the cellular
network before the WLAN link breaks while trying to stay in
the WLAN as long as possible because of its relatively high
bandwidth and low cost. Since a WLAN has smaller coverage
and is usually covered by a 3G network, when the mobile
terminal (MT) steps out of the WLAN area, the decay of
the signal fromthe WLAN should be accurately detected. A
timely decision of handoff should be made properly, and the
MT should switch the connection to the appropriate 3G network
successfully. In the second direction, the objective of
handoff is usually to improve QoS and acquire higher bandwidth
with lower cost. In this paper, we will focus on the
first direction, which is the handoff fromthe WLAN to the
3G network.
For a WLAN, signal power is limited, which causes the
signal strength to be quite easily influenced by physical obstruction
and blocks. For example, if the MT passes some
blocks or moves into the elevator, there will be an abrupt
drop in its received WLAN signal strength. In this case,
the MT may not have enough time to finish the WLAN-to
-3G-Network vertical handoff procedure before the link to
WLAN breaks. Therefore, how to effectively detect the signal
decay to trigger the handoff becomes a very important
issue.
In this paper, we propose to maintain a Handoff Trigger
Table (HTT) at the Access Point (AP) to record some
location information on transition areas in which vertical
575
handoffs occur. With the information of the HTT, a proactive
handoff scheme is proposed to enable the MTs to start
the vertical handoff procedure early enough to finish the
vertical handoff procedure, thus the handoff call dropping
probability can be decreased dramatically.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2,
some related work is discussed. In Section 3, we propose a
Handoff Trigger Table to assist making handoff decisions.
The handoff schem e based on this table is also presented.
Section 4 gives simulation results to demonstrate the better
performance of the proposed scheme in comparison with the
traditional one. Section 5 concludes the paper.
RELATED WORK
In traditional handoff schemes, the received signal strength
(RSS) has been used as an indicator for making handoff decisions
. Some of the traditional approaches are as follows:
[5]
· RSS: handoff takes place if the RSS of a candidate
point of attachment is larger than the RSS of the current
point of attachm ent (RSS
new
&gt; RSS
current
);
· RSS plus threshold: handoff is made if the RSS of a
candidate point of attachment is larger than that of the
current point of attachment and the latter is less than a
certain pre-defined threshold T (RSS
new
&gt; RSS
current
and RSS
current
&lt; T );
· RSS plus hysteresis: a handoff takes place if the RSS
of the candidate point of attachment is larger than the
RSS of the current one with a pre-defined hysteresis
margin H (RSS
new
&gt; RSS
current
+ H);
· Algorithm plus dwell timer: sometimes a dwell timer
can be added to the above algorithms. This timer is
started when one of the above conditions happens, and
the handoff takes place if the condition is met for the
entire dwell timer interval.
For the vertical handoff process, it may not be very reliable
to make handoff decisions based only on the RSS of the point
of attachment (e.g., AP of the WLAN) and the candidate
point of attachment (e.g., base station of the 3G network)
because of the asymmetric nature of the handoff problem
[6].
As mentioned before, the handoff from WLAN to 3G network
is expected to be efficient and effective. Some methods
have been proposed to achieve this goal. One of them
is the Fast Fourier Transform(FFT)-based decay detection
[1]. This approach tries to estimate the signal decay, and
will trigger the handoff after the signal is confirmed to be
decreased to a certain threshold. However, this approach
has high calculation complexity with the need of frequent
sampling, and suffers from estimation errors. In [2], handoff
triggering nodes are used to notify the mobile terminal to
start the handoff. These special nodes are data stations installed
in WLAN/cellular transition regions where vertical
handoffs occur. When an MT moves close to it, the handoff
triggering node will send a handoff trigger command to trigger
the link layer handoff. Using handoff trigger node can
be good at triggering the handoffs, but if they are needed in
many places within a WLAN, it will be costly to set up many
trigger nodes. In addition, if there are new blocks appearing
in the WLAN, it is hard to determine where the additional
trigger nodes should be installed. Therefore, this approach
is not very flexible. The Fuzzy logic based handoff algorithm
[3][4] is proposed to assist making handoff decisions.
This algorithmdecreases handoff delay and the number of
unnecessary handoffs by changing the RSS average window
according to the MT speed. It is worth mentioning that
some fuzzy logic based algorithms are complex and may not
be easy to be implemented in practical systems.
HANDOFF TRIGGER TABLE FOR 3G/ WLAN NETWORKS
Recently, WLAN has been expected to provide user location
information [6]-[10], which is helpful for making vertical
handoffs. We propose to use a Handoff Trigger Table (HTT)
to store such location information at the AP and utilize it to
trigger the WLAN-to-3G vertical handoff explicitly. Based
on this table, a proactive handoff scheme is proposed to assist
MTs to handoff in the right places at the right time.
With this scheme, handoff decisions can be more efficient
and handoffs are more likely to succeed compared with the
traditional schemes which trigger the handoff mainly based
on the received signal strength at the MTs.
3.1
Handoff Trigger Table
A typical integrated 3G/WLAN network is shown in Fig. 1.
The HTT is normally implemented at the APs of WLAN
and used to record the user location information which will
be helpful to make handoff decisions as explained later. An
example of the HTT is given in Table 1.
Table 1: An example of HandoffTrigger Table
X
1
+ D &gt; x &gt; X
1
- D
Y
1
+ D &gt; y &gt; Y
1
- D
X
2
+ D &gt; x &gt; X
2
- D
Y
2
+ D &gt; y &gt; Y
2
- D
· · ·
· · ·
X
n
+ D &gt; x &gt; X
n
- D Y
n
+ D &gt; y &gt; Y
n
- D
In the HTT, the information of the locations where an
MT needs to handoff is given. We defined Black Holes (BH)
the small areas in which the received signal strength at an
MT decreases abruptly and the link to the AP breaks in a
very short time. In such BHs, if the MT does not switch
the connection to the 3G network, it will not be able to
keep the connectivity to its correspondence node. Each BH
is proposed to be covered by a slightly larger area, namely,
proactive area. When MTs move into a proactive area, the
AP will send a message to notify the MT to start proactive
handoff (detailed in Section 3.2), regardless of the current
received signal strength at the MT. In Table 1, (X
i
, Y
i
, i =
1, 2, · · · , n) are the location coordinates of the center of the
BHs, and D is the distance between the center of the black
hole and proactive area edges. (X
n
+ D &gt; x &gt; X
n
-D, Y
n
+
D &gt; y &gt; Y
n
- D) is an example of possible ways to describe
the proactive area. Note that other types of proactive areas
such as circles can also be adopted. Fig. 1 illustrates the
above two concepts, wherein A, B and C are three BHs
within the WLAN, and A', B', C' are the corresponding
proactive areas.
The HTT will be initialized when the AP is installed in
the WLAN, then it will be dynamically updated. In the initial
stage, MTs will handoff in a traditional way, i.e., handoff
576
Figure 1: An example of WLAN with Black Holes
when the received signal strength decreases to a threshold.
In addition, the MT sends out a handoff notification to the
AP, and the AP will record the coordinates of this handoff
location into the HTT. Usually BH is not a dot, but
a small area. Therefore, for each BH, the HTT will store
many coordinates of points where vertical handoffs occur,
then the AP will try to merge these coordinates to form a
corresponding proactive area and put it into the HTT. After
the initialization stage, the HTT will only contain the description
of proactive areas instead of individual coordinates
of BHs. Meanwhile, the AP will often check the HTT to decide
whether any MT enters the proactive areas. When a
new BH appears, the AP will be able to record its proactive
area into the HTT after some vertical handoffs take place
near this BH, similar to the initial stage. When a BH disappears
due to some reasons (e.g., restructure in the WLAN),
there will be no vertical handoffs occur in the corresponding
proactive area. As a result, the AP will remove the entry
of this proactive area fromthe HTT after some predefined
time, which can be decided by the system administrator.
With the above methods, the HTT is maintained dynamically
and can adaptive to the change of the environment.
3.2
Proactive Handoff Scheme
Based on the Handoff Trigger Table, we propose a proactive
handoff scheme to achieve better handoff performance.
In the traditional scheme, the handoff decision mechanism
is that a handoff will be triggered when the current RSS is
lower than a threshold (THm) or RSS from the candidate
network is higher than a threshold (THw). The procedure
is illustrated in Fig. 2.
In the proposed scheme, we divide the handoff into two
stages, a proactive handoff stage and a handoff stage. In the
proactive handoff stage, when an MT moves into a proactive
area, the AP will send it a proactive handoff message.
Following that the MT will send out a binding update message
to the AP and start this network layer handoff. The
procedure is given in Fig. 3.
When an MT enters the WLAN, the RSSs in sampling
intervals will be measured and their averages are computed.
At the same time, the AP will check if the MT is in any
proactive area. If yes, it will send a control message Pre-Handoff
-CMD to the MT. After receiving this message, the
MT will start to send the cellular network a message to request
a connection. When the signal decreases to a certain
threshold R
t
, the link-layer handoff starts, and the MT will
Handoff execution
RSS&lt;Rt
No
Yes
Start handoff
Averaging
Measurements
Figure 2:
Traditional handoffscheme for Hybrid
Networks
Measurements
Averaging
Handoff Trigger
Table
Handoff execution
RSS&lt;Rt
Pre-handoff
Yes
No
Figure 3: Proactive handoffscheme for Hybrid Networks
switch the connection to the cellular network. When the
received signal strength decreases to R
t
, but the MT still
does not receive the Pre-Handoff-CMD, it will send a message
to informthe AP to add this location coordinate into
the HTT. The threshold R
t
is a design parameter that can
be set by the administrator to best enable vertical handoff
procedure under the WLAN-specific physical situation.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, we compare the performance of the proposed
vertical handoff scheme with HTT and the traditional
handoff scheme by simulation. Consider the simplified network
model for 3G/WLAN networks shown in Fig. 1. We
assume that the 3G network covers the WLAN area. The
RSS of the WLAN signal at an MH is assumed as a function
of the distance d between the MH and the AP[11]:
RSS(d) = P T · L · 10n log(d) + f(µ, ) dBm , where P T
is the transmitted power, L is a constant signal power loss,
n is the path loss exponent, and f(µ, ) represents shadow
fading modeled as zero mean Gaussian random variable with
mean µ and standard deviation . In the WLAN, there are
a number of BHs, in which the RSS will decrease to almost
zero immediately and the MT will have to handoff to the
3G networks.
577
The popular Random Waypoint mobility model [12] is
used to simulate the mobility of the MTs in the WLAN.
At the beginning, the MTs' positions in the WLAN are uniformly
distributed. Each MT will move at a random speed
V , which is uniformly distributed in [V min, V max], and in
a randomdirection. After randomtime T m, the MT will
stop and stay for randomtime T s, with both T m and T s
uniformly distributed in [0, 2s]. The MT will continue the
movement as described above. Any MT that moves out of
the WLAN will be eliminated, and a new MT will be gener-ated
in the WLAN with a randomly chosen location. Some
other parameters used in the simulations are given in Table
2.
Table 2: Parameters for the numerical examples
Parameter
Value
PT
100mW
R
t
-85dbm
n
3.3

7dB
Handoff time
2s
Velocity range
0 ­ 2 m /sec
Number of BHs
3
WLAN area
100m
× 100m
We define the transition time as the time from when an
MT starts handoff to the moment it moves into a BH, and
handoff time as the time from when an MT sends out the
binding update message to the moment it receives the first
package fromthe Base Station.
The drop of a call only
happens when the transition time is less than the handoff
time.
In Figs. 4, 5 and 6, we present the dropping probability
of the proposed scheme and the traditional handoff scheme
based on different proactive distance, D, and two values of
user mobility rate, V , respectively. Fig. 4 illustrates the
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
User Mobility rate
Drop Probablity
Traditional Method
D=0.4 HTT Method
D=0.5 HTT Method
Figure 4: Effect of user mobility
effect of user mobility on the connection dropping probability
. In this figure, the dropping probabilities for proactive
distance D = 0.4 and D = 0.5, are given. In these results
, handoff time is 2s. From the figure, we can see that
the handoff probability has been reduced with the explicit
handoff trigger in the proposed scheme, because mobile terminals
can have more time to execute the handoff. When
the proactive distance increases, the dropping probability
decreases. This is due to the fact that when the proactive
distance is larger, the time for the MT to execute the handoff
will be longer. We can also see that when the MTs move
faster, dropping probability will increase as well, because
shorter time is made available for the MT to execute the
vertical handoff given the same D. Compared with the HTT
scheme, the traditional scheme is more sensitive to the user
mobility rate, and the dropping probability increases rapidly
as the mobility increases.

0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
Distance of prehandoff
D
r
oppi
ng P
r
obabl
i
t
y
V=0.5 Traditional Method
V=0.5 HTT Method
V=1 Traditional Method
V=1 HTT Method
Figure 5: Effect of proactive distance
Fig. 5 shows that as the proactive distance increases, the
dropping probability of HTT scheme decreases very fast and
it is quite sensitive to the distance increasing. When the user
mobility rate increases, the dropping probability will also
increase, which conforms with the results in Fig. 4. Fig. 6
shows the impact of the handoff time (in practical value
range) on the dropping probability. With a given transition
time, if the handoff time increases, the dropping probability
will be higher, as expected.
Fig. 7 shows that the impact of the distance between AP
and BH on the dropping probability. The signal strength
decays with the distance to the AP in WLANs. In the proposed
scheme, MTs start network layer handoff in advance
according to the parameter D and regardless of the RSS, so
the performance of the proposed scheme is independent from
the distance d between the BH and the AP. However, for a
given RSS threshold, the performance of traditional handoff
scheme relies heavily on d, and it has better performance
for the BHs which are far fromthe AP. This is because the
signal strength is relatively high near the AP, and MT will
normally find that its RSS is above the threshold. As the
MT enters the BH, the signal strength degrades so abruptly
that the MT does not have enough time to do handoff, which
leads to high dropping probability. In contrast, the RSS of
an MT moving around a BH that is far from the AP will
be relatively low and may be close to the threshold, hence
a handoff decision may be easily triggered before the MT
enters the BH. In this case, the MT gets longer time to conduct
the handoff procedure so a relatively lower dropping
probability can be achieved.
578

1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Handoff time(s)
D
r
oppi
ng P
r
o
bab
l
i
t
y
Traditional Method
HTT Method
Figure 6: Effect of Vertical handoff time

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Distance between AP and BH
Dr
oppi
ng P
r
obabl
i
t
y
Traditional Method
D=0.4 HTT Method
D=0.5 HTT Method
Figure 7: Effect of distance between AP and BH
FromFig. 7, we can also see that for the proposed scheme,
the proactive distance D should be set properly. Similar
requirement applies to the setting of the threshold in the
traditional scheme. If D or the threshold is set to be high,
there will be many unnecessary handoffs although the dropping
probability will decrease. On the other hand, if D or
the threshold is too low, the dropping probability will increase
.
However, the dependence on d of the traditional
handoff scheme cannot be eliminated by simply adjusting
the threshold, which makes the selection of a proper threshold
in the traditional scheme even more difficult.
We further study the performance of the two schemes in
the WLAN with different number of BHs. The locations
of the BHs are set to be uniformly distributed within the
WLAN. FromFig. 8, it can be seen that for both schemes
the dropping probability is not sensitive to the number of
BHs when their locations are uniformly distributed. The
case for BHs with non-uniformdistribution is left as future
work.
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0.04
0.045
Number of BHs
Dropping Probablity
Traditional Method
D=0.4 HTT Method
Figure 8: Effect of number of BHs
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, vertical handoffs fromWLAN to 3G cellular
network has been investigated. To support making proper
handoff decisions, a Handoff Trigger Table (HTT) has been
proposed to be implemented at the AP of WLAN to record
the location information of BHs.
Based on this table, a
proactive handoff scheme has been proposed. Simulation
results have been given to show that with the information
in the HTT, the vertical handoff decisions can be made more
efficiently and dropping probability can be decreased signif-icantly
. Possible future work include making the proactive
distance D a variable for different environments and further
investigating the unnecessary handoff events in different prehandoff
schemes. The HTT scheme can also be used in sys-temdiscovery
to assist reducing MH power consumption.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work has been supported jointly by the Natural Sciences
and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada
under Strategic Grant No. 257682 and Research in Motion
(RIM).
REFERENCES
[1] Q. Zhang, C. Guo, Z. Guo and W. Zhu, "Efficient
mobility management for vertical handoff between
WWAN and WLAN", IEEE Communications
Magazine Vol. 41, Issue 11, Nov. 2003, pp. 102­108.
[2] W.-T. Chen; J.-C. Liu; H.-K. Huang, "An adaptive
scheme for vertical handoff in wireless overlay
networks", Proceedings of International Conference on
Parallel and Distributed Systems 2004, 7-9 July 2004,
pp. 541­548.
[3] P. Khadivi, T.D. Todd and D. Zhao, "Handoff trigger
nodes for hybrid IEEE 802.11 WLAN/cellular
networks", Proc. QSHINE 2004, pp. 164­170.
[4] A. Majlesi and B.H. Khalaj, "An adaptive fuzzy logic
based handoff algorithmfor interworking between
WLANs and mobile networks", Proc. PIMRC'02,
Sept. 2002, pp. 2446­2451.
[5] K. Pahlavan, et al., "Handoff in hybrid mobile data
579
networks", IEEE Personal Communications, Vol.7,
No.2, April 2000, pp. 34­47.
[6] J.-Z. Sun, J. Sauvola and D. Howie, "Features in
future: 4G visions froma technical perspective", Proc.
GLOBECOM'01, Nov. 2001, pp. 3533­3537.
[7] P. Bahl and V. Padmanabhan, "RADAR: An
in-building RF-based user location and tracking
system", Proc. IEEE INFOCOM'00, Tel-Aviv, Israel,
2000, pp. 775­784.
[8] P.Krishnan, A.S. Krishnakumar, W.-H. Ju, C.
Mallows, and S. Ganu, "A systemfor LEASE:
location estimationassisted by stationary emitters for
indoor RF wireless networks", Proc. IEEE
INFOCOM'04, Hongkong, 2004, pp. 1001­1011.
[9] K.-I. Itoh, S. Watanabe, J.-S. Shih, and T. Sato,
"Performance of handoff algorithm based on distance
and RSSI measurements", IEEE Trans. Vehic.
Technol., Vol. 51, No. 6, Nov. 2002, pp.1460 - 1468.
[10] J. Makela, M. Ylianttila and K. Pahlavan, "Handoff
decision in multi-service networks", Proc. PIMRC'00,
Sept. 2000, pp. 655­659.
[11] A.H. Zahran and B. Liang, "Performance evaluation
framework for vertical handoff algorithms in
heterogeneous networks", Proc ICC 2005, May 2005,
pp. 173­178
[12] C Bettstetter, H Hartenstein and X Perez-Costa,
"Stochastic properties of the randomwaypoint
mobility model", Wireless Networks, Vol. 10, No. 5,
Sept. 2004, pp. 555­567.
580

