2D Information Displays
ABSTRACT
Many exploration and manipulation tasks benefit from a coherent
integration of multiple views onto complex information
spaces. This paper proposes the concept of Illustrative
Shadows for a tight integration of interactive 3D graphics
and schematic depictions using the shadow metaphor. The
shadow metaphor provides an intuitive visual link between
3D and 2D visualizations integrating the different displays
into one combined information display. Users interactively
explore spatial relations in realistic shaded virtual models
while functional correlations and additional textual information
are presented on additional projection layers using a
semantic network approach. Manipulations of one visualization
immediately influence the others, resulting in an in-formationally
and perceptibly coherent presentation.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.5.2 [Information Interface
and Presentation]: User Interfaces--Screen design;
I.2.4 [Artificial Intelligence]: Knowledge Representation
Formalisms and Methods--Semantic networks; I.3.6 [Computer
Graphics]: Methodology and Techniques--Interaction
techniques
General Terms
Design, Human Factors

INTRODUCTION
In many areas knowledge about structures and their meaning
as well as their spatial and functional relations are required
to comprehend possible effects of an intervention.
For example, engineers must understand the construction of
machines as a prerequisite for maintenance whereas the
spatial composition of molecules and hence possible reactions
are of importance for the discovering of new drugs in
chemistry. Medical students need to imagine the wealth of
spatial and functional correlations within the human body
to master anatomy.
To date, novices as well as domain experts are required to
consult several, often voluminous documents in parallel to
extract information for a certain intervention. Spatial relations
, characteristics of structures inherently three-dimensional
, such as the shape and location of structures, however
, are difficult to convey on paper. Besides requiring a
significant amount of images to illustrate spatial relations
between only a few structures, the mental integration of
multiple views to form a three-dimensional picture in mind
is demanding. Spatial relations can be conveyed more ef-fectively
by means of 3D models <A href="102.html#8">[18]. Using interactive 3D
graphics, available to more and more people due to recent
advances in consumer graphics hardware, the user may actively
explore the spatial correlations of structures within a
photorealistic virtual model (see upper left of <A href="102.html#1">Figure 1).
Here, the visual realism of the model facilitates recognition
on real encounters.
Information about functional correlations, such as the interplay
of muscles causing an upward motion of the human
foot, has been traditionally provided by means of text and
illustrations as found in textbooks. Simple, non-photorealistic
drawings enriched with annotations and metagraphical
symbols can be extremely powerful in conveying complex
relationships and procedures (see upper right of <A href="102.html#1">Figure 1).
Abstraction techniques reduce the complexity of the depicted
structures to illustrate the important aspects thereby
guiding the attention of the viewer to relevant details. In
contrast to the visualization of spatial relations, 3D graphics
add no significant value to the illustration of functional
correlations.
Figure 1: Illustrative Shadows provide an intuitive, visual link
between spatial (3d) and non-spatial (2d) information displays
integrating them into one combined information display.
M. tibialis anterior
M. extensor hallucis longus
M. extensor digitorum longus
M. tibialis posterior
M. flexor digitorum longus
M. flexor hallucis longus
M. fibularis brevis
M. fibularis longus
interactive 3d-graphic
2d-information display
shadow
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
specific permission and/or a fee.
IUI'03, January 12­15, 2003, Miami, Florida, USA.
Copyright 2003 ACM 1-58113-586-6/03/0001...$5.00.
166
The integration of both aspects in one visualization is difficult
since each serves to fulfill a different goal with, partly
mutually exclusive, visualization techniques. It becomes
even more complicated if the 3D model is frequently manipulated
, such as in construction or recent interactive
learning environments. Here, occludings by annotations
and metagraphical symbols are annoying and may even interrupt
the current manipulation for the user. Additional
views, whether as insets <A href="102.html#8">[20], separate objects like mirrors
<A href="102.html#8">[8], or in form of lenses and volumetric cursors changing
the rendition of embedded structures <A href="102.html#8">[7, 21, 23], are either
not close enough to the manipulated structures to be fully
recognized without dividing the users attention between
different views <A href="102.html#8">[13] or require sometimes tedious manipulations
to be placed or moved within the scene. Nonetheless
, additional information as to restrictions or functional
correlations pertaining the current manipulated structures is
highly desired, even necessary.
In this paper we present an approach called Illustrative
Shadows that provides an intuitive, visual link between an
actively manipulated 3D visualization and a supplemental
2D information display integrating them into one combined
information display (see <A href="102.html#1">Figure 1). One of the main ideas
behind Illustrative Shadows is the integration of secondary
information, or in other words, background information,
into an interactive 3D scene. By analyzing the users' manipulation
of 3D structures and finding correlations, graphical
and textual information about the current interaction
context, such as graphical object-details and textual labels,
are displayed in the ``background''--the shadow--to give
guidance as well as to further enhance the users' understanding
of the context.
The paper is structured as follows: After reviewing related
approaches to combine multiple visual and textual information
displays, we present the design of Illustrative Shadows.
Furthermore, an architecture realizing these concepts is discussed
in this section. Thereafter, the major components of
this architecture are described. Realization issues are subject
of the subsequent section, whereas application examples
and the summary conclude the paper.
RELATED WORK
Recently proposed tools for the exploration of virtual
scenes extend possibilities to display covered structures or
hidden details. A complementary view called Magic Mirror
that mimics a hand mirror has been introduced in <A href="102.html#8">[8]. In addition
to providing the optical effects of a real mirror, it also
allows to explore the insight of objects by clipping against
the mirror front-frustum. Magic lens filters as presented in
<A href="102.html#8">[7, 21] go further by combining an arbitrarily-shaped region
with an operator that changes the view of objects viewed
through that region thereby displaying different aspects of
the visualized information space. In <A href="102.html#8">[5, 23] the 2D lens approach
is extended to 3D using volumetric lenses. All
aforementioned techniques require the user to actively manipulate
a tool within the scene. These techniques assume
the user already knows which parts of the presented visualization
offer additional information or is willing to explore
the model. While this might be feasible in explorative environments
where navigation is the main interaction task, it
certainly hinders manipulation.
Several approaches to combine 3D and 2D visualizations
have been made using a corner cube environment (
). The
three orthogonal sides show image slices that provide a visual
context for a 3D model or structures displayed in the
center. In <A href="102.html#8">[11] the images have been integrated as back-planes
to ground the 3D representation of anatomic structures
visually. By outlining the 3D structures in the images,
the spatial correspondence between the 3D renditions of activated
foci in the context of human brain slices is emphasized
in <A href="102.html#8">[16]. The images, however are precomputed and do
not change according to the users' interaction nor is there
any visualization of functional correlations. An interesting
interactive approach has been proposed by <A href="102.html#8">[10]. The projection
of the 3D model onto the sides of the corner cube
can be manipulated by the user in order to change the position
and orientation of the model. Fully rendered shadows
of certain objects resemble real-world mirrors and may be
used to stress importance. There is, however, no discussion
on how to use this feature to provide, for instance, additional
context information for the user.
To establish hypotheses on the interaction context in order
to be able to display additional context information and to
provide meaningful descriptions of relationships knowledge
modeling is required. Promising approaches to connect
those knowledge with 3D graphics have been developed
in the area of medical applications. The Digital
Anatomist <A href="102.html#8">[4] incorporates a logic-based description comprising
class and subclass relationships (is-a) as well as partitive
and qualitative spatial relationships (has-parts, is-superior
-to). The information is presented in tree-like textual
form that can be explored by folding and unfolding. Corresponding
structures are displayed in a 3D visualization
aside. There is no visual integration of both information
displays. The semantic network described in <A href="102.html#8">[14] is used to
create various `views' in which correlating structures are
displayed to communicate specific aspects with a voxel
model of the human anatomy. The highly detailed visualization
, however, cannot be interactively explored, nor is
there any kind of abstraction to focus the users' attention.
Interaction is only possible by tree-like menus.
SYSTEM DESIGN USING ILLUSTRATIVE SHADOWS
With the term Illustrative Shadows we refer to a coherent
integration of photorealistic depictions of a virtual model
with abstract illustrations and textual explanations. Both
Figure 2: Architecture of a system incorporating the Illustrative
Shadows approach.
3D
model
3D
visualization
2D
visualization
Visualization
annotations
Knowledge
-based
server
Client interface
System
Event control
167
kinds of depictions serve to fulfill different and somehow
contradicting goals: on the one hand to enable navigation
and manipulation of complex spatial models and on the
other hand to provide adjusted visualizations that guide the
user's attention to additional information about the most
relevant objects in the current interaction context. Both visualizations
are achieved by applying photorealistic and
specific non-photorealistic rendering techniques <A href="102.html#8">[22] to
geometric models.
Furthermore, textual information describing the most relevant
structures and functional correlations between them
must be integrated. The estimation of the relevance with respect
to the current interaction context as well as the selection
or generation of textual explanations heavily rely on
non-geometric formal and informal representations and are
therefore determined by external inference mechanisms.
Moreover, co-referential relations between the entities
within the geometric model and the formal and informal
representations have to be established in order to link the
different representations.
Based on these requirements we designed a system architecture
which comprises three basic components (see
<A href="102.html#2">Figure 2):
· The visual component renders a photorealistic 3D
model with a standard camera model as well as a non-photorealistic
illustration that is projected onto a
ground plane. A client interface enables external control
of the non-photorealistic rendering techniques. Finally
, the visual component also renders text and
metagraphical annotations, such as labels, hypertext
and arrows.
· The event control allows the user to modify the parameters
of a virtual camera and to select and manipulate
geometric objects within the scene. Interactions are
tracked and ranked within an interaction history to
communicate the current interaction context via a client
interface to an external knowledge-based component.
· The knowledge-based server receives notification of
user manipulations and establishes hypotheses on the
degree of interest values (DOI) for geometric objects.
These DOI values guide the selection of appropriate
text fragments presented in text annotations as well as
the modification of parameters of the non-photorealistic
rendering techniques for emphasizing in the illustration
.
The following sections discuss important aspects of these
system components.
VISUALIZATION
Besides displaying a photorealistic rendition of a 3D model
that the user can manipulate, the illustration of functional
correlations between structures of the model in the "background"
has to be accomplished. To focus the user's attention
on relevant structures and to facilitate perception, important
objects must be emphasized and surroundings
abstracted. Furthermore, both visualizations must be integrated
in a coherent manner, so that a visual connection between
the 3D and 2D renditions of the relevant objects is
established by the user. Several crucial aspects have to be
considered:
· How can objects be emphasized such that they attract
the user's attention while still being in the background?
· Are additional graphical elements required to establish
a visual correlation between the two model representations
?
· What illustration techniques can be applied to differentiate
between important and less important objects?
· Is a continuous synchronization between the photorealistic
and the schematic representation of the model necessary
during user interactions?
Integrating Different Model Representations
The question coming up at this point is how a secondary,
schematic model representation can be integrated such that
the following requirements are fulfilled:
· The second representation must be placed near the original
3D representation in order to perceive structures in
<A href="102.html#8">both representations [13].
· The secondary representation may never occlude the
central, realistic 3D visualization, which a user manipulates
directly. The relevant information, however, must
be visible in order to be recognized but should not distract
from the interaction with the 3D model.
An exact copy of the 3D model representation is not appropriate
for the task of depicting functional correlations, because
their illustration in the "background" requires abstraction
. Without abstraction, a lot of the users' attention
would be required to extract the relevant information. An
exact copy, however, can be used to provide a mirrored
view below the 3D model to visualize structures otherwise
not visible for the user (see <A href="102.html#7">Figure 9 at the end). The integration
of a secondary view as inset <A href="102.html#8">[20] has some disadvantages
too. Firstly, the inset must not occlude the 3D
model, thus it must be placed in distance which in turn
means visual separation. Secondly, the inset framing complicates
the visualization of object correlations, e.g. by
lines.
An ideal solution in many respects is to project the 3D
model onto a plane below the model, just like casting a
shadow. This 2D representation may then be modified in
various ways to illustrate associated concepts and relations
and therefore is called Illustrative Shadows. Besides, this
approach satisfies the requirements specified above.
Illustrative Shadows
Cast shadows <A href="102.html#8">[3] have proven to be beneficial for perceiving
spatial relationships and to facilitate object positioning
Figure 3: Different types of model projections onto the illustration
plane. Beside simple, monochrome projections (shadows),
the color of individual structures can be preserved. The mirrored
projection shows details otherwise hidden in the current view.
;;
;;;
;;;
;;
;;
;;
;;
Monochrome projection
Colored projection
Mirrored projection
168
<A href="102.html#8">[24]. Thus, their use, if already present, occupies no additional
space for the display of additional information, or in
the case of prior absence, also add valuable depth cues to
the 3D visualization. Furthermore, the shadows can be used
to interact with the underlying information context or, as
proposed in <A href="102.html#8">[10], with the shadowing 3D objects. To sum
up:
· The shadow projection results in an abstraction which
is very important for illustrations.
· Additional depth cues facilitate the perception of spatial
relations and accelerate the relative positioning of objects
while manipulating the 3D model.
· The projection establishes a link between a 3D object
and its 2D shadow providing additional information.
Displaying and Focusing in the Illustration Plane
Besides simple, monochrome shadow projection further
possibilities to project the 3D model representation onto the
illustration plane come to mind (see <A href="102.html#3">Figure 3). Preserving
the colors of the different structures of the model, for instance
, enables distinct renditions and perception of the objects
in the shadow. As an extension, the objects can be mirrored
before projecting them. Hence, objects or hidden
details of objects otherwise not visible become visible in
the illustration plane.
To illustrate correlations or to annotate structures, the relevant
objects must be emphasized to be easily distinguished
from the remaining 2D visualization. Also, the viewer must
be able to differentiate between relevant and less relevant
objects. For monochrome shadow projections, the object
color must contrast with the shadow color. The selection of
emphasizing colors should be based on a perception oriented
color model, such as the HSV. Moreover, an outline
can be used to attract the viewer's interest. A colored projection
makes it somewhat more difficult since the variation
of the color won't always result in a noticeable distinct representation
. By using a conspicuous texture or shaded representations
of the relevant object whereas the remaining
objects are flat-shaded, the viewer's attention can be directed
to those relevant objects.
Significance of Accentuations
In addition to objects being significant to the current interaction
context supplementary objects have to be included in
the illustration. These objects are not of primary importance
within the concepts to be illustrated but guide the
viewer and maintain context. It is important that such objects
are recognized by the viewer as objects of minor significance
. The relevance of objects that have been emphasized
by outlining, for instance, can be judged by line width
or line style (e.g. contrast, waviness). Also preserving the
objects color as well as the use of texture indicates a higher
importance than an interpolation of the object's color and
the background color.
Recognition of Correlations between both Representations
An important aspect in using two different but coherent representations
of the same model is the identification of correlations
between those visualizations by the viewer. If an object
is being emphasized in the illustration plane, it must be
possible for the viewer to find its counterpart in the detailed
photorealistic representation too. Often shape and color
give enough hints. However, if the projection of the relevant
objects results in uniform shapes, the viewer may have difficulties
to recognize individual objects in the 3D visualization
(see <A href="102.html#4">Figure 4). Besides accentuating those objects in
the 3D representation, the integration of additional elements
can be beneficial. Semi-transparent shadow volumes
originally developed to facilitate object positioning in 3D
<A href="102.html#8">[19] indicate direct correspondence (see Figure <A href="102.html#4">5).
Integration of Annotations
The conveyance of important related facts by means of
graphical abstraction, accentuation, or modification of relevant
structures alone is difficult. Therefore conventional
book illustrations often contain annotations with short descriptions
. Those annotations must be placed close to the
described objects and should not occlude relevant parts of
the presentation. The latter, however, cannot always be
guaranteed. A simple but effective solution places the annotation
on a semi-transparent background face that increases
the contrast between text annotation and illustration and
still does not block vision (see <A href="102.html#4">Figure 5). To further facilitate
absorption of shown concepts, single words or groups
of words can be emphasized and graphically linked to relating
structures in the illustration. Hypertext functionality reduces
the amount to which textual annotations must be displayed
at once. The user can request more detailed
information by activating links.
Figure 4: Recognition of individual objects in different scenes.
To the left, unequivocal correspondence of shape and color
facilitates identification. To the right, no clear correspondence.
Figure 5: A direct connection to an object's shadow is established
by displaying its semi-transparent shadow volume. The
integration of annotations gives meaning to unknown objects and
relationships.
169
INTERACTION
A human illustrator is required to identify important aspects
and characteristic features of the subject or concept that is
to be conveyed in order to draw a focussed visualization.
One way to identify those features for the computer is to
watch the user interacting with the information space. Since
our goal has been to enhance the users' understanding by
providing background information in the current interaction
context, an Illustrative Shadow depicting correlations in
that context must be generated.
By navigating within the 3D model on the one hand, the
user is free to explore spatial relations by changing the
view. Here, single structures may be tracked by the computer
regarding their visibility hence obtaining information
about the users' current focus. On the other hand, the user
may interact with the structures, thus expressing specific interest
. As a result of the integrated 3D/2D visualization, interaction
is possible within the 3D visualization as well as
in the projection layers, a technique inspired by <A href="102.html#8">[10]. Using
the shadow for interaction facilitates certain tasks, such as
selection, since structures hidden in the 3D visualization
may be visible in the projection. Furthermore, 2D input device
coordinates can be mapped directly onto the plane
thereby enabling the use of 2D interaction techniques.
The provided manipulation tasks highly depend on the application
that employs the concept of Illustrative Shadows.
In our application, the user is able to compose and to decompose
a given 3D model like a 3D jigsaw. Thus, translation
and rotation of individual structures are main interaction
tasks.
User-interactions are tracked within an interaction history.
By assigning relevance values to each interaction task, accumulations
of these values show a distribution of interest
within the model over time. Thus each single structure's degree
of interest (DOI, a normalized value) is a measure for
its importance to the user at a certain time. As shown in
<A href="102.html#5">Table 1, touching a structure with the mouse pointer has a
much lower relevance than actually selecting it. The degree
of interest is communicated to the knowledge server which
in turn may modify the 2D visualization of the shadow. To
give an example, the user is interested in a certain structure
of an anatomic 3D visualization, such as a ligament, that is
part of a functional relation between a bone and a muscle.
Only one of those objects, that is the bone or the muscle,
should be highlighted and annotated, because of space restrictions
in the shadow layer. At this point, the DOI is used
to decide. If the interaction history shows more user-interest
for muscles, information about the functional relation
between the ligament and the muscle is displayed.
KNOWLEDGE MODELING
While segmentation of the 3D model into individual structures
(objects) provides a spatial description, the presentation
of correlations also requires a linked symbolic, textual
description. Moreover, in order to establish hypotheses on
the current interaction context, formal knowledge is required
. Thus, the system presented in this paper comprises
a knowledge base, i.e. a media-independent formal representation
, media-specific realization statements of entities
within the formal representation as well as a large multi-lingual
text corpus. Realization statements establish co-reference
relations between independent formal representations
describing different aspects of the underlying information
space. They also guide the generation or selection of texts
used to annotate structures in the 2D visualization.
The medical education application presented later in this
paper is based on a knowledge base describing the objects
and functional correlations of the musculo-skeletal system.
It covers the area of the lower limb and the pelvic girdle.
The knowledge base was created by manually analyzing
several anatomy textbooks, anatomy atlases, medical dictionaries
, and lexica. This analysis reveals important concepts
, their hierarchical classification, and the instance attribute
values forming a complex semantic network. Our
system contains a hierarchical representation of basic anatomic
concepts such as bones, muscles, articulations, tendons
, as well as their parts and regions. The corpus contains
fragments of several anatomic textbooks describing global
concepts of the osteology, syndesmology, and myology as
well as descriptions of all the entities of these anatomic systems
within the lower leg and the pelvic girdle.
In order to present appropriate system reactions the event
control informs the knowledge server of user interactions.
First, exploiting the visual annotations, the knowledge
action
parameter
value
relevance
mouseOver
time
short
1
long
2
mouseButtonPressed
location
3D object
4
2D object
4
annotation
6
Table 1. Relevance of certain user interactions
Figure 6: Visualization of intermediate steps within a retrieval
which discovers the association between the distal phalanx of the
big toe and the extensor hallucis longus.
has-Basis
has-Area
has-Basis
Os-Longum
Bone-Basis
Musculus
Bone-Area
Phalanx distalis pedis
Basis phalangis distalis pedis
Area insertion of
M. extensor hallucis longus
M. extensor hallucis longus
1
2
3
1
2
3
Instance
Relation
Concept
170
server extracts co-referring formal entities and assigns relevance
values according to <A href="102.html#5">Table 1. Subsequently, the
knowledge server searches for associations between the
most relevant entities. Our system pursues two alternative
strategies: retrievals and suggestions.
Retrievals discover relations between entities by tracking
predefined paths within the knowledge base. <A href="102.html#5">Figure 6 illustrates
the intermediate steps in order to extract relations between
bones and muscles. From a functional point of view
(i.e. the muscle mechanics), bones are insertions or origins
of muscles. Its contraction produces force, which in turn
changes the orientation of these bones. These retrievals also
need to consider substructures (e.g. bone-volumes and
bone-area). The following retrieval extracts those muscles,
which originate in a given bone (first logic order):
The has-Part* relation represents the transitive hull over
several spatial part-of-relations <A href="102.html#7">[1] (e.g. the has-Basis relation
between Bones and Bone-Volumes and the has-Area relation
between Areas or Volumes and Areas).
These retrievals rely on knowledge about the structure of
the knowledge base. Moreover, they refer to a small number
of relevant objects. In many situations, however, the event
control comes up with a huge number of potential relevant
objects, which cannot easily be mapped to a predefined
query. Hence, we adopt a bottom-up search approach
within a complex semantic network developed within cognitive
psychology.
In his model of human comprehension <A href="102.html#8">[15] Quillian assumed
that spatially and temporally independent aspects of
human long-term memory are organized in a semantic network
. Furthermore, he assumed that cognitive processes
that access a node of the semantic network activate all connected
nodes in parallel. The term spreading activation refers
to a recursive propagation of initial stimuli. Nowadays,
this term subsumes breadth-first search algorithms for paths
connecting the nodes of a start and a destination set in directed
graphs satisfying an evaluation criterion. Collins and
Loftus <A href="102.html#8">[6] modify the propagation algorithm to consider activation
strength.
In our system, the knowledge server uses the objects' DOI
from the event control as an initial activation, which
spreads through the semantic network. These initial activa-tions
also take the content presented on textual labels and
inspected by the user into account. The spreading activation
approach generates a focus structure which contains information
how dominant graphical objects must be presented
in the schematic illustration <A href="102.html#8">[9]. <A href="102.html#6">Figure 7 illustrates how visual
dominance values control the render parameters.
REALIZATION DETAILS
The visual component of the prototypical implementation
extends the Open Inventor graphical library with powerful
scenegraph nodes to display hypertext on overlay regions
and to render semi-transparent shadow volumes.
Other nodes encapsulate the mirror and shading projection
onto the ground plane as well as the user interaction, and
emphasize techniques (e.g. computation of silhouette
lines). The layer management (see <A href="102.html#6">Figure 8) employs the
OpenGL polygon offset feature to allow graphics to overlap
specifically whereas visibility-tests of individual structures
are accomplished by offscreen rendering and analyzing
OpenGL p-buffers. Additional OSF Motif widgets
enable the user to add personalized annotations, which are
inserted into the knowledge base.
The knowledge base encodes both the media-independent
formal knowledge representation as well as media specific
realization statements using XML topic maps <A href="102.html#7">[2]. To process
this information, XML statements are transformed into
LISP-code. The authoring system contains export filters for
the NeoClassic and the LOOM <A href="102.html#8">[12] description logic inference
machine. In the current version it covers about
50 basic
anatomic
concepts,
70 relations,
and
over
1500 instances, with linguistic realization statements in
Latin, German and English. Furthermore, visual annotations
refer to a small number of geometric models and 2D
illustrations.
The interface between the knowledge server and the visual
component is described using CORBA's interface definition
language (IDL). The CORBA-based interface implementation
enables us to experiment with several knowledge serv-Figure
7: Application of different emphasize techniques to the
2D information representation according to decreasing dominance
values.
{ muscle | bone: Bone(bone)
Musculus(muscle)

(
is-Origin-of (bone, muscle)

part: has-Part*(bone, part)
is-Origin-of (part, muscle))
}
Figure 8: Multiple layers are used to place the different visual
information in order. Thereby, occluded details may be visible
in the shadow (3).
Outline
Highlight
Ordinary
Detail
Annotation
1
3
2
171
ers implemented in Common-LISP (LOOM) and C++
(NeoClassic).
APPLICATIONS
We applied the concept of Illustrative Shadows to an application
of medical education. This system had been previously
designed to foster the understanding of spatial relationships
by means of 3D models based on a virtual 3D
jigsaw approach <A href="102.html#8">[19]. While composing anatomical structures
has proven to help medical students to build an understanding
of the spatial composition <A href="102.html#8">[17], most of the users
expressed their desire for detailed information about functional
relations between structures. Consequently, students
would be able to playfully study human organs including
their spatial and functional correlations. Figures <A href="102.html#7">9 and <A href="102.html#7">10
depict the screen of the prototype in typical learning sessions
. Individual objects can be detached and moved within
the scene to expose occluded structures. In <A href="102.html#7">Figure 9, one of
the alternative visualization, the mirror, is shown to demonstrate
the various employments of the plane. It enables the
user to simultaneously look at two different views of the 3D
model. Graphical accentuations are used to attract the
viewer's attention (left atrium). Additional textual annotations
are assigned to correlating structures in a hypertext
representation which can be explored by following sepa-rately
marked links.
Another application that has not yet been realized is to support
users of CAD systems by Illustrative Shadows. CAD
systems are not only used to design individual components
in 3D but also to assemble complex systems. Information
about parameters of single components and relationships
are of major importance. Being able to retrieve this information
directly from the scene while interacting with the
components is of great benefit for the design engineer.
CONCLUSIONS
For educational, engineering, or maintenance purposes a
wealth of information about spatial and functional correlation
as well as textual information is required. In this paper
we developed a new metaphor-based approach to coher-ently
integrate different views onto such a complex information
space within an interactive system. Illustrative
Shadows provide an intuitive visual link and a level of integration
between interactive 3D graphics and supplemental
2D information displays that is hard to achieve with other
concepts.
Shadow projections have proven to be beneficial for perceiving
spatial relationships and to facilitate object positioning
. Thus, their use, if already present, occupies no additional
space for the display of additional information, or
in the case of prior absence, also add valuable depth cues to
the 3D visualization. The shadow projection onto a flat
plane enables schematic illustrations which are focused on
specific information extraction tasks and facilitates the integration
of generated textual information that leads to further
meaning. Thus, Illustrative Shadows promote the comprehension
of complex spatial relations and functional
correlations. Furthermore, the secondary information display
does not hinder manipulations of the 3D model. Our
approach is well suited for compact 3D models, and has
been successfully applied to an application of medical education
REFERENCES
1. Bernauer, J. Analysis of Part-Whole Relation and Subsumption
in the Medical Domain. Data & Knowledge
Engineering, 20(3):405­415, October 1996.
2. Biezunski, M., Bryan, M., and Newcomb, S., editors.
ISO/IEC 13250:2000 Topic Maps: Information Technology
­ Document Description and Markup Language
. International Organization for Standarization
Figure 9: Alternative visualization. The Mirror facilitates manipulation
in 3D, by providing a better view of the structures. The
central representation is never occluded by annotations.
Figure 10: German annotation of objects previously selected.
Realization statements of the semantic network provide alternative
German, English, and Latin phrases referring to formal entities.
172
(ISO) and International Electrotechnical Commission
(IEC), December 1999. 1. Draft.
3. Blinn, J.F. Me and my (fake) shadow. IEEE Computer
Graphics & Applications, 8(1):82­86, January/Febru-ary
1988.
4. Brinkley, J.F., Wong, B.A., Hinshaw, K.P., and Rosse,
C. Design of an Anatomy Information System. IEEE
Computer
Graphics &
Applications,
19(3):38­48,
May/June 1999.
5. Cignoni, P., Montani, C., and Scopigno, R. Magic-sphere
: An insight tool for 3d data visualization. IEEE
Computer Graphics Forum, 13(3):317­328, 1994.
6. Collins, A. and Loftus, E. A Spreading-Activation Theory
of Semantic Processing. Psychological Review,
82(6):407­428, 1975.
7. Fishkin, K. and Stone, M.C. Enhanced dynamic queries
via moveable filters. In Katz, I.R., Mack, R., Marks, L.,
Rosson, M.B., and Nielsen, J., editors, Proc. of ACM
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(Denver, May 1995), pages 415­420. ACM Press,
New York, 1995.
8. Grosjean, J. and Coquillart, S. The magic mirror: A
metaphor for assisting the exploration of virtual worlds.
In Zara, J., editor, Proc. of Spring Conference on Computer
Graphics (Budmerice, Slovakia, April 1999),
pages 125­129, 1999.
9. Hartmann, K., Schlechtweg, S., Helbing, R., and
Strothotte, T. Knowledge-Supported Graphical Illustration
of Texts. In De Marsico, M., Levialdi, S., and
Panizzi, E., editors, Proc. of the Working Conference on
Advanced Visual Interfaces (AVI 2002), pages 300­307,
Trento, Italy, May 2002. ACM Press, New York.
10. Herndon, K.P., Zeleznik, R.C., Robbins, D.C., Conner,
D.B., Snibbe, S.S., and van Dam, A. Interactive shadows
. In Proc. of ACM Symposium on User Interface
and Software Technology (Monterey, November 1992),
pages 1­6. ACM Press, New York, 1992.
11. Höhne, K.H., Pflesser, B., Pommert, A., Riemer, M.,
Schiemann, T., Schubert, R., and Tiede, U. A virtual
body model for surgical education and rehearsal. IEEE
Computer, 29(1):25­31, January 1996.
12. MacGregor, R. A Description Classifier for the Predicate
Calculus. In Hayes-Roth, B. and Korf, R., editors,
Proc. of the Twelfth Annual National Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-94), pages 213­220, Seattle
, Washington, August 1994. AAAI Press, Menlo
Park.
13. Moreno, R. and Mayer, R.E. Cognitive principles of
multimedia learning. Journal of Educational Psychology
, 91:358­368, 1999.
14. Pommert, A., Höhne, K.H., Pflesser, B., Richter, E.,
Riemer, M., Schiemann, T., Schubert, R., Schumacher,
U., and Tiede, U. Creating a high-resolution spatial/
symbolic model of the inner organs based on the visible
human. Medical Image Analysis, 5(3):221­228, 2001.
15. Quillian, M. Semantic Memory. In Minsky, M., editor,
Semantic Information Processing, chapter 4, pages
227­270. MIT Press, Cambridge., 1968.
16. Rehm, K., Lakshminaryan, K., Frutiger, S., Schaper,
K.A., Sumners, D.W., Strother, S.C., Anderson, J.R.,
and Rottenberg, D.A. A symbolic environment for
visualizing activated foci in functional neuroimaging
datasets. Medical Image Analysis, 2(3):215­226, ???
1998.
17. Ritter, F., Berendt, B., Fischer, B., Richter, R., and
Preim, B. Virtual 3d jigsaw puzzles: Studying the effect
of exploring spatial relations with implicit guidance. In
Herczeg, M., Prinz, W., and Oberquelle, H., editors,
Proc. of Mensch & Computer (Hamburg, September
2002), pages 363­372, Stuttgart · Leipzig · Wiesbaden,
2002. B.G.Teubner.
18. Ritter, F., Deussen, O., Preim, B., and Strothotte, T.
Virtual 3d puzzles: A new method for exploring geometric
models in vr. IEEE Computer Graphics &
Applications, 21(5):11­13, September/October 2001.
19. Ritter, F., Preim, B., Deussen, O., and Strothotte, T.
Using a 3d puzzle as a metaphor for learning spatial
relations. In Fels, S.S. and Poulin, P., editors, Proc. of
Graphics Interface (Montréal, May 2000), pages 171­
178. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco,
2000.
20. Seligmann, D.D. and Feiner, S. Automated generation
of intent-based 3d illustrations. In Proc. of ACM SIG-GRAPH
Conference on Computer Graphics (Las
Vegas, July 1991), pages 123­132. ACM Press, New
York, 1991.
21. Stone, M.C., Fishkin, K., and Bier, E.A. The moveable
filter as a user interface tool. In Plaisant, C., editor,
Proc. of ACM CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (Boston, April 1994), pages 306­
312. ACM Press, New York, 1994.
22. Strothotte, T. and Schlechtweg, S. Non-Photorealistic
Computer Graphics: Modeling, Rendering, and Animation
. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco,
2002.
23. Viega, J., Conway, M.J., Williams, G., and Pausch, R.
3d magic lenses. In Proc. of ACM Symposium on User
Interface and Software Technology (Seattle, November
1996), pages 51­58. ACM Press, New York, 1996.
24. Wanger, L.R. The effect of shadow quality on the perception
of spatial relationships in computer generated
imagery. In Proc. of Symposium on Interactive 3D
Graphics (Cambridge, March 1992), pages 39­42.
ACM Press, New York, 1992.
See also: http://isgwww.cs.uni-magdeburg.de/research/is/
173
