Easy Language Extension with Meta-AspectJ
ABSTRACT
Domain-specific languages hold the potential of automating
the software development process. Nevertheless, the adop-tion
of a domain-specific language is hindered by the difficulty
of transitioning to different language syntax and employing
a separate translator in the software build process.
We present a methodology that simplifies the development
and deployment of small language extensions, in the context
of Java. The main language design principle is that of
language extension through unobtrusive annotations. The
main language implementation idea is to express the language
as a generator of customized AspectJ aspects, using
our Meta-AspectJ tool. The advantages of the approach are
twofold. First, the tool integrates into an existing software
application much as a regular API or library, instead of as
a language extension. This means that the programmer can
remove the language extension at any point and choose to
implement the required functionality by hand without needing
to rewrite the client code. Second, a mature language
implementation is easy to achieve with little effort since AspectJ
takes care of the low-level issues of interfacing with
the base Java language

.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.1.2 [Programming
Techniques]:
Automatic Programming;
D.2.13
[Software Engineering]: Reusable Software; D.3.3 [Programming
Languages]: Language Constructs and Features
General Terms
domain-specific languages, language extensions
INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION
The idea of extensible languages has fascinated programmers
for many decades, as evident by the extensibility fea
This material is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grants No. CCR-0220248
and CCR-0238289.
Copyright is held by the author/owner.
ICSE'06, May 20­28, 2006, Shanghai, China.
ACM 1-59593-085-X/06/0005.
tures in languages as old as Lisp.
From a Software Engineering
standpoint, the main advantages of expressing a
concept as a language feature, as opposed to a library API,
are in terms of conciseness, safety, and performance.
A
language feature allows expressing the programmer's intent
much more concisely--in contrast, libraries are limited to
a function- or method-call syntax. A language feature also
allow better static error checking--a library can only check
the static types of arguments of a function call against the
declared types of the formals. Finally, a language feature
can take advantage of context information and employ an
optimized implementation, while a library routine cannot be
customized according to its uses.
Despite these advantages, there are excellent reasons why
full language extensibility is undesirable. Changing the syntax
and semantics of a programming language is confusing
and can lead to incomprehensible code. Furthermore, programming
languages are complex entities, designed to provide
a small number of features but allow them to be combined
as generally as possible.
A new feature can either
increase the complexity of the language implementation significantly
(because of interactions with all existing features),
or will need to be limited in its interactions, which is a bad
language design principle that leads to single-use features
and design bloat.
In past work [3], we have advocated expressing small
language extensions purely through unobtrusive annotations
. Indeed, the introduction of user-defined annotations
in mainstream programming languages, such as C# and
Java, has allowed specialized language extensions (e.g., for
distributed computing, persistence, or real-time programming
) to be added without changing the base syntax.
We believe that the approach of limited language extension
through annotations meshes very well with an implementation
technique that uses our Meta-AspectJ (MAJ)
tool [4] to express the semantics of the language extension.
Specifically, MAJ is a language that allows writing programs
that generate aspects in the AspectJ language [1]. The programmer
can easily express an extension to the Java language
as a program that: a) reads annotations and type
information from an existing program using Java reflection;
b) outputs a customized AspectJ aspect that transforms the
original program according to the information in the annotation
; c) executes the generated aspect by using the standard
AspectJ compiler.
In other words, our approach uses the AspectJ language
as a compiler back-end.
AspectJ code is not written by
the application programmer but generated by the language
865
extension, for the sole purpose of expressing program transformations
easily and generally. This is appropriate, as AspectJ
embodies the Aspect-Oriented Programming [2] philosophy
of expressing program enhancements orthogonally
and independently of the original source code.
Our approach has the advantage of simplifying the implementation
of the language extension significantly, without
encouraging undisciplined language extension (since the
only extensions allowed are through annotations). Specifically
, the approach leverages the engineering sophistication
of the AspectJ compiler implementation and its provisions
for dealing correctly with different Java language features.
If a programmer were to replicate the same effort by hand,
she would likely need to reproduce much of the AspectJ
compiler complexity.
The purpose of this paper is to support the idea of implementing
small language extensions as programs that produce
aspects. We have recently implemented a number of
such small extensions to Java and they all exhibit a striking
simplicity. Specifically, we did not have to implement (or
extend) a Java parser, we did not need to deal with syntax
tree pattern matching and transformation, and we did not
need to provide special handling for many Java complexities.
The combined annotations-MAJ approach ensured that our
small language extensions were implementable in a few hundreds
of lines of code, without sacrificing generality in their
conditions of use. We discuss two such extensions in detail,
after first introducing the MAJ language.
BACKGROUND MAJ SYNTAX
MAJ is an extension of Java that allows writing programs
that generate AspectJ source code.
MAJ offers
two operators for creating AspectJ code fragments: `[...]
("quote") and #[...] ("unquote").
The quote operator
creates representations of AspectJ code fragments. Parts
of these representations can be variable and are desig-nated
by the unquote operator (instances of unquote can
only occur inside a quoted code fragment).
For example
, the value of the MAJ expression `[call(* *(..))] is
a data structure that represents the abstract syntax tree
for the fragment of AspectJ code call(* *(..)).
Similarly
, the MAJ expression `[!within(#className)] is a
quoted pattern with an unquoted part. Its value depends
on the value of the variable className.
If, for instance,
className holds the identifier "SomeClass", the value of
`[!within(#className)] is the abstract syntax tree for the
expression !within(SomeClass).
MAJ also introduces a new keyword infer that can be
used in place of a type name when a new variable is being
declared and initialized to a quoted expression. For example,
we can write:
infer pct1 = `[call(* *(..))];
This declares a variable pct1 that can be used just like any
other program variable. For instance, we can unquote it:
infer adv1 = `[void around() : #pct1 { }];
This creates the abstract syntax tree for a piece of AspectJ
code defining (empty) advice for a pointcut. Of course, since
AspectJ is an extension of Java, any regular Java program
fragment can be generated using MAJ.
We can now see a full MAJ method that generates a trivial
but complete AspectJ file:
void generateTrivialLogging(String classNm) {
infer aspectCode =
`[
package MyPackage;
aspect #[classNm + &quot;Aspect&quot;] {
before : call(* #classNm.*(..))
{ System.out.println(&quot;Method called&quot;); }
}
];
System.out.println(aspectCode.unparse());
}
The generated aspect causes a message to be printed before
every call of a method in a class. The name of the affected
class is a parameter passed to the MAJ routine. This code
also shows the unparse method that MAJ supports for creating
a text representation of their code.
EXAMPLE 1 FILLING INTERFACE METHODS
Our first language extension is simple but a good example
to our approach, since it can be defined very quickly and it
is hard to implement with alternate means.
The Java language ensures that a class cannot declare
to "implement" an interface unless it provides implementations
for all of its methods. Nevertheless, this often results
in very tedious code. For instance, it is very common in
code dealing with the Swing graphics library to implement
an event-listener interface with many methods, yet provide
empty implementations for most of them because the application
does not care about the corresponding events. The
example code below is representative:
private class SomeListener
implements MouseListener, MouseMotionListener {
public void mousePressed (MouseEvent event) {
... // do something
}
public void mouseDragged (MouseEvent event) {
... // do something
}
// the rest are not needed. Provide empty bodies.
public void mouseReleased (MouseEvent event) {}
public void mouseEntered (MouseEvent event) {}
public void mouseExited (MouseEvent event) {}
public void mouseMoved (MouseEvent event) {}
}
Of course, the programmer could avoid providing the
empty method bodies on a per-interface basis, by associating
each interface with a class that by default provides empty
implementations of all interface methods. Then a client class
can inherit the empty implementations and only provide implementations
for the methods it needs. This pattern is indeed
supported in Swing code (through library classes called
adapters), but it is usually not possible to employ since the
listener class may already have another superclass. Instead,
it would be nice to provide a simple Java language extension
implemented as an annotation. The implementation of
the extension would be responsible for finding the unimple-mented
methods and supplying empty implementations by
default (or implementations that just return a default primitive
or null value, in the case of methods that have a return
866
type). In this case, the above class could be written more
simply as:
@Implements ({&quot;MouseListener&quot;,&quot;MouseMotionListener&quot;})
public class SomeListener {
public void mousePressed (MouseEvent event) {
... // do something
}
public void mouseDragged (MouseEvent event) {
... // do something
}
}
Of course, this extension should be used carefully since
it weakens the tests of interface conformance performed by
the Java compiler.
We implemented the above Java extension using MAJ.
The code for the implementation was less than 200 lines
long, with most of the complexity in the traversal of Java
classes, interfaces, and their methods using reflection. The
code processes a set of given Java classes and retrieves the
ones with an Implements annotation. It then finds all methods
that are in any of the interfaces passed as arguments to
the Implements annotation and are not implemented by the
current class. For each such method, code is generated in an
AspectJ aspect to add an appropriate method implementation
to the class. For instance, the code to add the method
to the class in the case of a void return type is:
infer newMethod =
`[ public void #methodName (#formals) {} ];
aspectMembers.add(newMethod);
Finally, the class needs to be declared to implement the
interfaces specified by the annotation. This is easily done
by emitting the appropriate AspectJ code:
infer dec = `[declare parents:
#[c.getName()] implements #[iface.getName()]; ];
The final aspect (slightly simplified for formatting reasons
) generated for our earlier listener class example is:
public aspect SomeListenerImplementsAspect1 {
void SomeListener.mouseEntered(MouseEvent e) {}
void SomeListener.mouseExited(MouseEvent e) {}
void SomeListener.mouseMoved(MouseEvent e) {}
void SomeListener.mouseReleased(MouseEvent e) {}
declare parents:
SomeListener implements MouseListener;
declare parents:
SomeListener implements MouseMotionListener;
}
This aspect performs exactly the modifications required
to the original class so that it correctly implements the
MouseListener and MouseMotionListener interfaces.
We invite the reader to consider how else this language
extension might be implemented. Our approach of using
annotations in combination with MAJ yielded a very simple
implementation by letting AspectJ deal with most of the
complexities of Java. Specifically, we did not have to deal
with the low-level complexities of either Java source syntax
or Java bytecode. For instance, we did not have to do any
code parsing to find the class body or declaration that needs
to be modified.
Dealing with Java syntactic sugar, such
as inner classes, was automatic. We did not need to do a
program transformation to add the implements clauses or
the extra methods to the class. Similarly, we did not need
to worry about the valid syntax for adding an implemented
interface if the class already implements another.
EXAMPLE 2 LANGUAGE SUPPORT FOR OBJECT POOLING
Our second example language extension addresses a common
programming need, especially in server-side programming
. Software applications often find the need for pooling
frequently-used objects with high instantiation costs. We
use the following database connection class as a running example
:
public class DBConnection {
public DBConnection(String dbURI,
String userName,
String password ) { ... }
public void open() { ... }
public void close() { ... }
}
The cost of an open() call is very high for a database connection
. In applications concerned with performance, such as
high-volume websites with lots of database requests, one often
finds the need to pool database connections and keep
them open, instead of repeatedly creating new ones and
opening them.
Making a class such as DBConnection into a "pooled"
class involves at the very least creating a pooling manager
class that knows how to manage instances of the class being
pooled.
A different pooling manager class is needed
for each class being pooled, since the manager needs to
have class-specific information such as how to instantiate
a new instance of the class when the pool is running low
(e.g., DBConnection objects are created by a constructor
call, followed by an open() call), and how to uniquely identify
objects of the same class that belong to different pools
(e.g., DBConnection objects of different dbURI, userName,
and password combinations need to be in different pools,
and the pooling manager needs to understand which pool to
fetch objects from when a request arrives).
We expressed the pooling concept as a language feature
that can used transparently with any Java class, as long
as some broad properties hold regarding its construction
and instantiation interface. The rest of the application will
be completely oblivious to the change. This facilitates the
application of pooling after a large code base which uses
the class in its non-pooled form has been developed. Using
our extension, converting a class to a pooled class involves
only 4 annotations: @pooled, @constructor, @request, and
@release. For example, to convert the DBConnection class
into a "pooled" class, and to adapt an existing code base to
using the pooled functionality, the user only has the add the
following annotations to the code:
@pooled(mgr=pooled.PoolTypes.BASIC, max=10, min=2)
public class DBConnection {
@constructor
public DBConnection(String dbURI,String userName,
String password ) { ... }
867
@request public void open() { ... }
@release public void close() { ... }
}
The @pooled annotation indicates that class DBConnection
should be pooled. It accepts parameters that can be used to
customize the pooling policy. @constructor annotates the
constructor call whose parameters serve as unique identifiers
for different kinds of DBConnection objects. In this example,
DBConnection objects with different dbURI, userName, and
password combinations should be maintained separately.
@request annotates the method that signals for the request
of a pooled object, and @release annotates the method call
that signals for the return of the pooled object back to the
pooling manager.
The implementation of this extension using MAJ is less
than 400 lines of code.
The MAJ program searches for
classes annotated with @pooled, and generates two Java
classes and one aspect to facilitate converting this class to be
pooled. We next describe the generated code in more detail.
The reader may want to consider in parallel how the same
task could be accomplished through other means. Neither
conventional Java facilities (i.e., classes and generics) nor
AspectJ alone would be sufficient for expressing the functionality
we describe below in a general way, so that it can
be applied with little effort to arbitrary unomdified classes.
For instance, none of these facilities can be used to create a
proxy class with methods with identical signatures as those
of an arbitrary Java class.
First, a pooling manager class, PoolMgrForDBConnection,
is generated for DBConnection.
The pooling manager
class contains methods for requesting and releasing pooled
DBConnection objects, as well as code to manage the expansion
of the pool based on the min and max parameters.
In order to retrofit an existing code base to use
DBConnection as a pooled class, we need to introduce proxy
objects that will be used wherever an object of the original
class would exist in the application code. This is necessary
as different objects from the perspective of the client code
will correspond to the same pooled object. We generate a
proxy class as a subclass of the pooled class. In our example
: DBConnection_Proxy extends DBConnection. All
instances of the proxy class share a static reference to
an instance of PoolMgrForDBConnection.
Each proxy instance
holds (non-static) references to the parameters to
the @constructor constructor call, and the DBConnection
object obtained from the pooling manager. The proxy class
rewrites the @request and @release methods: the @request
method is rewritten to obtain an object of DBConnection
type from the pooling manager, using the unique identifiers
kept from the constructor call, and the @release method
returns the DBConnection method back to the pool, while
setting the reference to this object to null. The MAJ code in
the proxy takes care to exactly replicate the signature of the
original methods, including modifiers and throws clauses.
For instance, the @release method in the proxy is generated
as:
infer meth =
`[ #mods #ret #[m.getName()] (#formals) #throwStmt
{
m_poolMgr.release(m_uniqueId, m_proxiedObj);
m_proxiedObj = null;
}];
All other methods simply delegate to the same method in
the superclass.
The idea is to have variables declared to hold a
DBConnection object, now hold a DBConnection_Proxy object
.
Therefore, to complete the "proxy" pattern, we
need to change all the calls of new DBConnection(...) to
new DBConnection_Proxy(...). This is the role of our generated
aspect: tedious recoding effort is easily replaced by
an aspect: the aspect intercepts all the constructor calls of
DBConnection, and returns an object instantiated by calling
new DBConnection_Proxy(...).
In summary, a user can easily turn a class into a pooled
class, and retrofit any existing code base to use this class in
its new, pooled form. The client code does not need to be
hand-edited at all, other than with the introduction of our
4 annotations.
FUTURE WORK
We believe that the years to come will see the emergence
of a healthy ecology of small language extensions
based on the annotation features of Java and C#. There
are already major examples of such extensions, especially
with distribution- and persistence-related annotations, implemented
in the context of J2EE Application Servers. Such
extensions can be implemented with heavyweight support-e
.g., parsing files, or recognizing annotations in a class loader
and performing bytecode manipulation. In fact, the JBoss
AOP mechanism (in whose early design and implementation
we have played an active role) is the foremost example
of infrastructure used to implement annotation-based language
extensions. Nevertheless, experience from compilers
in general-purpose languages has shown that it is beneficial
to develop a mature back-end language and implement high-level
features by translating to that back-end. Our approach
proposes that AspectJ is well-suited as such a back-end language
for small Java language extensions and that generating
AspectJ code offers significant simplicity benefits. In
the future we plan to support this claim with more examples
and perform a thorough comparison with competing
mechanisms.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Kiczales, E. Hilsdale, J. Hugunin, M. Kersten, J. Palm, and
W. G. Griswold. An overview of AspectJ. In ECOOP '01:
Proceedings of the 15th European Conference on
Object-Oriented Programming, pages 327­353, London, UK,
2001. Springer-Verlag.
[2] G. Kiczales, J. Lamping, A. Menhdhekar, C. Maeda, C. Lopes,
J.-M. Loingtier, and J. Irwin. Aspect-oriented programming. In
M. Ak¸
sit and S. Matsuoka, editors, Proceedings European
Conference on Object-Oriented Programming, volume 1241,
pages 220­242. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, and New
York, 1997.
[3] Y. Smaragdakis. A personal outlook on generator research. In
C. Lengauer, D. Batory, C. Consel, and M. Odersky, editors,
Domain-Specific Program Generation. Springer-Verlag, 2004.
LNCS 3016.
[4] D. Zook, S. S. Huang, and Y. Smaragdakis. Generating
AspectJ programs with meta-AspectJ. In Generative
Programming and Component Engineering (GPCE), pages
1­18. Springer-Verlag, October 2004.
868

