Development of E-commerce Statistics and the Implications
ABSTRACT
This text has analyzed the development of E-commerce in some 
developed countries such as Canada, U.S.A., Japan, etc and put 
forward several suggestions on how to set up the system of 
E-commerce in our country taking the national conditions of our 
country into account.

INTRODUCTION
Since the 1990s, the rapid development of e-commerce has 
brought extensive, enormous and far-reaching influence on the 
economy of the countries all over the world. E-commerce has 
already become the contemporary chief trend of economic and 
social development. As representatives of advanced productivity 
of new economic period, the level of its development has 
already become important signs of measuring the modernization 
level and comprehensive strength of countries and cities; it has 
become important means to make changeover in the economic 
system and reform the style of economic, promote the upgrading 
of the industrial structure, promote the modernized level of the 
city and strengthen international competitiveness. So, the 
governments all over the world have paid close attention to the 
development of E-commerce Statistics.
Though the development of informationization in our country is 
very quick, it still has great disparity with the developed 
countries for relatively late start. Our country is still in the 
interim facing the double task of informationization and 
industrialization at present. So, in order to carry on an instant, 
accurate Statistics to the development level of E-commerce and 
set up perfect E-commerce Statistics system, we must 
understand, absorb and bring in the theories and methods of 
E-commerce Statistics from the main foreign countries to make 
E-commerce Statistics become effective guarantee in leading 
and promoting e-commerce in a healthy way, combining social 
source and promoting national power.

DEVELOOPMENT STATES OF E-COMMERCE STATISTICS IN THE WORLD
We have chosen some representative countries in the world and 
analyzed the development of E-commerce Statistics in these 
countries.
2.1

Definitions of e-commerce in main
Developed countries.
The definition of e-commerce is the standard of carrying on 
E-commerce Statistics, but there are various kinds of definition 
of E-commerce in the world because of visual angles are 
different. So, it is necessary for each country to make a distinct, 
standard, practical, wide meaningful and measurable definition 
which should be suitable for each field and can be amenable to 
time.
2.1.1

Definition of e-commerce in OECD
(Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development)
There are broadly-defined e-commerce and the 
narrowly-defined e-commerce. The broadly-defined 
e-commerce means the activity of electronic transaction on item 
and service, no matter the transaction occurred between 
enterprise, family, government and other public or individual 
organizations. It uses network as a intermediary. Goods and 
service should be ordered on the network but the payment and 
goods service don't need to carry on the net; the 
narrowly-defined e-commerce is only referred to trade activity 
carrying on through Internet.
It is worth pointing out that the source of OECD definition of 
e-commerce is the Canada official Statistical department.
2.1.2

Definition of e-commerce in Canada
The e-commerce definition of Canada official Statistical 
department is: E-commerce is the transaction which based on 
the computer network, including the transformation of 
ownership, transformation of tangible and intangible assets right 
to use. It consists of B2B (business to business), B2C (business 
to consumer), B2G (business to government) and G2C 
(government to consumer). But the transaction taking place 
inside enterprises will not be included in the e-commerce 
Statistics.
2.1.3

Definition of e-commerce in the U.S.A.
Definition of e-commerce in the U.S.A. is defined by the U.S.A. 
general survey bureau who divides e-commerce into three parts 
from angle of the overall situation: e-commerce infrastructure; 
electronic affairs; e-commerce.
E-commerce infrastructure is the economic facility or 
equipment which is used for supporting electronic affairs or 
electronic transaction activities.
Electronic affairs include the affairs managed by computer 
network in company, government and other non- profit 
organization.
E-commerce refers to goods or service transaction activity 
completed on computer network.
70
2.2

Overview  and Characteristic of Main
Country's e-commerce Statistics
2.2.1

Overviews of e-commerce Statistical Surveys
2.2.1.1

Overviews of Canadian e-commerce
Statistical Survey
The e-commerce Statistics in Canada is an official activity that 
was presiding over by government and implemented concretely 
by State Statistics Bureau of Canada. Up till now, Canada has 
implemented four pieces of different e-commerce Statistics.
a) "Net-banking operation and bank service ­Statistics survey 
on internet and e-commerce application in financial department&quot;, 
this investigation is an irregular survey; its respondents are 
enterprises of the financial field and its nature is a separate 
investigation;
b) "Annually Statistical survey on internet application in family 
&quot;, is a fixed annual Statistical survey. It is a supplemented 
investigation and its respondents are families.
c) "The Statistics survey on communication technology and e- 
commerce&quot;, is an irregular Statistical survey; it is a supplement 
investigation and the respondents are enterprises in &quot;the 
standard industry of North America classifies"
d) "Annually Statistical survey on e-commerce and relevant 
technology &quot;, is a fixed annual Statistical survey; it is a 
supplemental investigation and the respondents are enterprises 
in "the standard industry of North America classifies"
2.2.1.2

Overviews of e-commerce Statistical survey
in U.S.A.
U.S.A. is one of the countries that e-commerce and e-commerce 
Statistical survey launched earliest in the world. The U.S.A. 
general survey bureau is the principal organ responsible for 
e-commerce Statistical survey.
The annually Statistical survey adopted by U.S.A. general 
survey bureau is consisted of annual sample investigation of 
commerce, annual sample investigation of manufacturing 
industry, annual sample investigation of retailing business and 
annual sample investigation of service trade. The method taken 
in these investigations is dividing layer and sampling. The 
concrete method in e-commerce Statistical survey is joining the 
questions of e-commerce into the existing questionnaire except 
the annually sample investigation of manufacturing industry 
which is joining the supplementary questionnaire. These 
respondents investigating are enterprises and the enterprise 
e-commerce activity, business procedure and sales amount are 
investigated on the foundation of existing investigation.
2.2.1.3

Overview of e-commerce Statistical survey
in other countries
2.2.1.3.1

Overview of e-commerce Statistical
survey in Japan
In Japan, the departments in chare of e-commerce Statistical 
survey is Statistics Bureau, Ministry of Internal Affairs and 
Communication, Japan, but other departments participate in the 
e-commerce Statistical survey such as Statistics Bureau of 
Cabinet, Statistics Bureau of Ministry of Economics and 
Industry, etc. So, there are more than forty kinds of official 
investigation on e-commerce which involve every aspect of 
e-commerce but have great differences in purpose, frequency 
and content. These investigations launch around three
departments including enterprises, governments and families.
2.2.1.3.2

Overview of e-commerce Statistical
Survey in S.Korean
Statistics bureau of the S.Korean began the official e-commerce 
Statistical survey since April of 2000. The investigation mainly 
concentrates on B2C (business to consumers) and B2B 
(business to business). The investigation on B2G (business to 
government) lags behind slightly, which began since the first 
quarter of 2001.
2.2.2

Characteristics of the e-commerce Statistical
Survey in each country.
a)

The organizers carrying on e-commerce Statistical survey in
the above-mentioned countries are all official departments, or 
implemented by cooperating with other relevant government 
departments (as Japan). The Statistical survey presided over by 
the government can not only strengthen its Fairness and 
dependability, but also give the survey authoritativeness.
b)

The investigations almost are not specially but
supplementary. The main reasons are high cost of special 
investigations and not perfect e-commerce Statistical systems of 
each country which have not reach the level of special 
investigation.
c)

The above-mentioned countries confirm the content of
investigation not only consulting the content that OECD 
recommends, but also considering the development level and 
characteristics of the national e-commerce. It is worth pointing 
out those indexes of Statistical survey in Singapore, Canada and 
U.S.A. are comprehensive and have involved the preferential 
investigation content that OECD recommends.
d)

Most investigations take the annually survey as the core, but
there also are monthly, quarter, general survey and irregular 
surveys. The industries included in monthly and quarterly 
investigation are not more than on generally, such as &quot;monthly 
trade sample investigation of retail business&quot; in U.S.A. and &quot;the 
investigation on family consumption trend&quot;, etc.
e)

Most countries adopt the sample investigations, but other
method as census and census combine with sample investigation 
are also adopted. The method of sampling is mainly used and 
the following two kinds are used less.

IMPLICATIONS OF E-COMMERCE STATISTICAL SURVEY IN OUR COUNTRY
The e-commerce in our country is still in the elementary stage 
and the e-commerce Statistical survey is just start too. There are 
just some semi-official or unofficial departments and 
organization trying to carry on e-commerce Statistical survey 
but not a formal, overall, official survey on e-commerce in our 
country. For instance: &quot;Statistical Reports on the Internet 
Development in China&quot;, &quot;CII research and calculating on 
e-commerce total index system in China&quot;, &quot;Statistical survey on 
intranet and e-commerce development level&quot;, &quot;investigation on 
e-commerce developing in enterprises &quot;, etc.
Most of above mentioned investigations are irregular, even once 
only, lack unified consideration and can't form a system except 
&quot;Statistical Reports on the Internet Development in China&quot; 
which hold regularly and establishes its own system to a certain
71
extent. Meanwhile, the unofficial survey is very apt to the 
systemic deviation and utility nature for it is not mandatory; 
even affect the fairness, accuracy and representativeness of the 
investigation result.
3.2
Implications of e-commerce Statistical
survey in China
According to the experience of some foreign countries that 
carrying on e-commerce Statistical and the development of 
e-commerce Statistical in our country, we consider that if we 
want to set up a comparatively perfect e-commerce Statistical 
survey system, we should accomplish the following several 
points at least:
3.2.1

Attach importance to the definition of
e-commerce
The kind, range and respondents are all fixed according to the 
definition of e-commerce which is prerequisite of e-commerce 
Statistical survey. There is not an authoritative definition of 
e-commerce in our country so that the key problem we met is 
how to define e-commerce when we carrying on the 
e-commerce Statistical survey.
We consider that open principle should be followed when 
defining e-commerce according to its characteristic of appearing 
late and excessive growth, in order to perfect it constantly with 
the development of e-commerce.
3.2.2

The government should take charge of
e-commerce Statistical survey
We could understand the development of e-commerce prompt 
and accurate, find the questions existing in e-commerce and 
predict the development trend according to the e-commerce 
Statistical. It is obvious that e-commerce Statistical is important 
to the sound development of e-commerce. E-commerce could be 
promoted by just and accurate Statistical survey but the 
unilateral and utilitarian Statistical survey will mislead even 
hamper it.
However, the e-commerce Statistical survey of our country 
lacks the authoritativeness and mandatory at present even 
affected the fairness and accuracy of Statistical survey. So, the 
Statistical survey of e-commerce in our country should be 
included in the official Statistical development plan as early as 
possible and we should set up the official survey system of 
e-commerce in order to make the e-commerce Statistical survey 
authoritative and promote the development of it.
3.2.3

Accelerate the research of the e-commerce
Statistical theory
The problem which should be considered first in research on 
Statistical theory of e-commerce is to keep the continuity with 
traditional Statistical. The e-commerce Statistical is not 
produced without foundation after all but is the extension on the 
network of traditional Statistical so that the basic theories of 
traditional Statistical are still suitable for the e-commerce 
Statistical survey.
Secondly, we should make further research on Statistical 
method, Statistical caliber and Statistical range of e-commerce, 
and then set up the index system of e-commerce Statistical as 
soon as possible.
Moreover, e-commerce has the characteristics of crossing over 
the limit of region. We should try our best to keep the harmony 
with the world on research in e-commerce Statistical theories 
for the overall and perfect system of e-commerce Statistical 
need the joint efforts of countries all over the world.
3.2.4

The service of e-commerce Statistical survey
should be comprehensively and pointed.
The e-commerce Statistical survey should serve not only for the 
macroscopically strategic policies of countries but also for the 
micro operation of enterprises. Meanwhile, there should be 
different surveys to conform to the different respondents in 
order to offer the personalized service of the Statistical survey. 
Only in that way can we offer the good development 
environment for e-commerce and reflect the value of 
e-commerce Statistical survey.

REFERENCES
[1].

Seminar of &quot;research on e-commerce Statistical survey and 
application&quot;. &quot;Statistical Surveys and Application of 
E-Commerce in Canada&quot; [J]. China Statistics,    2003, 3   
2003, 4
[2].

Seminar of &quot;research on e-commerce Statistical survey and 
application&quot;. &quot;Survey of e-commerce development in 
S.Korean&quot;. [J]. China Statistics, 2003, 5
[3].

Seminar of &quot;research on e-commerce Statistical survey and 
application&quot;. "Statistical Surveys and Application of 
E-Commerce in Japan&quot; [J]. China Statistics,  2003, 6
[4].

Seminar of &quot;research on e-commerce Statistical survey and 
application&quot;. "Statistical Surveys and Application of 
E-Commerce in the U.S.A.&quot; [J]. China Statistics, 2003, 7
[5].

&quot;Research paper of e-commerce development all over the 
world&quot;, translated by Juanying Zhu, Bingzhi Yang United 
Nations Trade and Development Board [M].2003.
[6].

&quot;The application of IT in Statisticals&quot; Feng Cui, [M] Lixin 
Accounting Publishing House,2003


72

