Using Roles and Business Objects to Model and Understand Business Processes
ABSTRACT
Business process modeling focus on describing how activities interact
with other business objects while sustaining the organization's
strategy. Business objects are object-oriented representations
of organizational concepts, such as resources and actors, which
collaborate with one another in order to achieve business goals.
These objects exhibit different behavior according to each specific
collaboration context. This means the perception of a business
object depends on its collaborations with other objects. Business
process modeling techniques do not clearly separate the multiple
collaborative aspects of a business object from its internal aspects,
making it difficult to understand objects which are used in different
contexts, thus hindering reuse. To cope with such issues, this
paper proposes using role modeling as a separation of concerns
mechanism to increase the understandability and reusability of
business process models. The approach divides a business process
model into a business object model and a role model. The business
object models deals with specifying the structure and intrinsic behavior
of business objects while the role model specifies its collaborative
aspects.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.2.9 [Management]: Software Process Models
D.2.10 [Design]: Methodologies
H.1.0 [Models and Principles]: General

INTRODUCTION
Representing and keeping the alignment between the multiple
elements of an organization is fundamental to understand how it
operates and how it can be adapted to cope with a changing business
environment [5]. This requires understanding how business
activities interact and are aligned with other organizational elements
while supporting the operation of the business.
In the past years, significant work, particularly in the area of
business process modeling has been proposed, ranging from general
modeling concepts to business automation languages [10, 16,
17, 18]. Business process modeling can be used for multiple purposes
, such as facilitating human understanding and communication
[29], supporting process improvement and re-engineering
through business process analysis and simulation [8, 17] and
automating the execution of business processes [1, 22].
A business process model captures the relationships that are
meaningful to the business between different organizational concepts
, such as activities, the resources used by activities and the
human or automated actors who perform these activities. Identifying
the properties and relationships of these concepts is fundamental
to help understanding and evolving the business since it facilitates
the communication between stakeholders, business specialists
and support system specialists.
We model business concepts as classes of business objects in a
consistent object-oriented glossary of business concepts from
where objects can be composed, specialized and reused.
However, fully characterizing the type of a business object, its
properties and relationships is not straightforward. This results
from a business object generally being used in different contexts
and relating to several other business objects in the organization.
For example, a business object modeling a
Product
may be
brought into play in several processes, such as
Manufacturing
,
Logistics
and
Selling
. In each of these contexts, it relates with different
activities and resources, displaying different and possibly overlapping
properties and behavior that are context-dependent. This
means the object acts as a multi-dimensional concept.
If business objects are modeled as one-dimensional concepts,
i.e. without its properties and behavior being described as dependent
on the context, then the objects will not have explicit information
on how to guide the design of a business support system that
is able to cope with evolution. For example, if the
Manufacturing
process changes, there may be changes to the
Product
object.
However, if the
Product
object does not explicitly represent the
aspects related to its manufacture, then there will be no information
on the properties requiring modifications.
This paper focus on describing on how to break up the universe
of process modeling and its business objects into different aspects
or areas of concern, of which each can then be handled independ-ently
and later composed to synthesize a complete model. To do
so, we propose defining two complementary conceptual models, a
role model and a business object model. The role model describes
business object collaborations and the properties of business objects
that are concerned with each role, being each role a type on
its own. The business object model describes the structure and the
properties of a business object that are independent of a specific
context. The relationships between business objects are specified
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
SAC'05, March 13­17, 2005, Santa Fe, NM, USA.
Copyright 2005 ACM 1-58113-964-0/05/0003...$5.00.
1308
2005 ACM Symposium on Applied Computing
by roles the objects play while collaborating. We argue that using
roles and business objects to model business processes improves
the understandability of the individual business objects and of the
process model. It also improves model reengineering since it promotes
reuse and makes explicit the dependencies between the
model elements.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: next section
reviews some of the research on business process modeling. Section
3 reviews role modeling, describes how roles can be identified
and defines the concepts of business objects and role. Section 4
presents how the business object and the role model can describe a
business process, followed by an example of application in section
5. Finally, section 6 sets out the conclusions and future work.
MODELING BUSINESS PROCESSES
The Workflow Reference Model [31] defines a business process
as a set of one or more connected activities, which collectively
realize a business objective or policy goal, normally within the
context of an organizational structure defining functional responsibilities
and relationships. This definition extends the definition
proposed by Davenport and Short [7] stating that a business process
is a set of logically related tasks performed to achieve a defined
business outcome. Most approaches to business process
modeling concentrate on some sort of process map or diagram,
which shows how activities are scheduled in the course of a business
process. Indeed, there is little disagreement about the key
elements process diagrams. There are usually ways to represent
decision points and to express various activity coordination patterns
, such as sequential flow, branching and parallel execution.
Some techniques introduce swim-lanes to indicate the responsibilities
of participants, such as departments or individuals. This allows
representing the activities performed by actors in the context of a
process.
Two representative coordination-oriented business process modeling
techniques that make use of actors, activities and swim-lanes
are Role Interaction Networks [24] and Role Activity Diagrams
[21]. Role Activity Diagrams provide the means to identify roles
and interactions. Roles organize a process' activities into sets of
operations associated with a given participant in the process. Interactions
show the dependencies between those participants. While
this approach improves the understandability of a process model
since it depicts what a participant does in a process, it falls short to
explain the behavior of the business objects in a specific context of
interaction. Additionally, roles are defined as groups of activities
and not as types, so they cannot be explicitly composed or specialized
.
Business process modeling is not limited to process diagrams.
The focus of this paper is not on process diagrams but on describing
the roles that are used to specify the responsibilities of business
objects. A business object is the model of a concept in the business
universe of discourse. It plays roles in a business process by means
of participating in different activities. Business objects participate
in different business processes in different contexts, thus playing
multiple roles. It is important to note that process diagrams do not
fully describe the business object structure and relationships, and
do not emphasize why activities are performed or roles are enacted
. Besides, they only identify actor roles, i.e. the roles of the
performer of an activity. This means, for example, that the properties
of a resource that is used by multiple activities are not separated
according to its usage context. The next section introduces
the fundamental concepts behind role theory and role modeling.
ROLE MODELING
In the late 1920s, role theory started to generated interest among
social scientists from many backgrounds, such as psychology and
sociology. Its central concern has been with patterns of human
conduct, context and social structure as well as with individual
response. The motivation for roles is to allow particular viewpoints
regarding the factors presumed to be influential in governing behavior
. It lies on a theatrical analogy of actors playing parts or
roles in a play. As Biddle and Thomas [4] have stated: "When actors
portray a character in a play, their performance is determined
by the script, the director's instructions, the performances of fellow
actors, and reactions of the audience as well as by the acting
talents of the players. Apart from differences between actors in the
interpretation of their parts, the performance of each actor is pro-grammed
by all of these external factors; consequently, there are
significant similarities in the performances of actors taking the
same part, no matter who the actual actors are."
There are many complementary definitions for the concept of
role but still there is no consensus on the properties to represent it.
In the late 1970s, sociological role theorists defined a role as "a
comprehensive pattern for behavior and attitude" [26] or as "be-havioral
repertoire characteristic of a person or a position" [3].
Nonetheless, the concept of role is used in computer science and
software engineering as a modeling technique that deals with separation
of concerns, i.e. the separation of the behavioral repertoire
characteristics of some concept. It is used in methodologies such
as RM-ODP [14] and in several object-oriented frameworks [10,
12, 14, 15, 25].
3.1 Business Objects and Roles
Modeling is an abstraction technique that consists of identifying
concepts of interest in some universe of discourse and representing
its essential features for a specific purpose in a model. In business
modeling, the universe of discourse corresponds to what is per-ceived
of an organization as being reality by business domain experts
.
Ontologies typically distinguish entities (nouns) from activities
(verbs). Entities are things that exist in the business, either concrete
(e.g. a person) or abstract (e.g. an organization). Activities
are things that happen in the business. Activities make use of the
business entities. We model both of these concepts as business
objects. A business object is then the super type of all objects that
represent business concepts with a well-defined boundary and
identity. It encapsulates the definition, attributes, behavior and
relationships to other business objects [20]. The state of a business
object is characterized by the values of its attributes. The behavior
is given by the actions that the business object is capable of performing
to fulfill its purpose, including changing its intrinsic attributes
and collaborating with other business objects.
Business objects have intrinsic and extrinsic features. Intrinsic
features describe it in isolation, while extrinsic features arise from
the relationships or collaborations with other business objects. For
example, a
Person
has intrinsic features such as
Age
and
Sex
, and
extrinsic features such as
Job Position
and
Salary,
which derive
from a transitory relationship between the
Person
and some
Organization
or
Company
. Intrinsic features may change over time
(e.g.
Age
) but always characterize the object. However, extrinsic
features may become inappropriate (e.g. the
Job Position
property
is not relevant when characterizing an unemployed person).
One way to separate the intrinsic features from the extrinsic features
of an object is by means of roles [4, 15, 23]. Roles, as a modeling
construct, aim at separating the concerns that arise from
1309
business object collaborations. We define a role as the observable
behavioral of a business object defined in a specific collaboration
context. Thus, a role represents the extrinsic features of a business
object when it collaborates with other business objects.
3.2 Identifying Roles
To distinguish roles from entities, Guarino et al. proposed two
criteria [11]. A role is a type that (1) is founded and (2) lacks semantic
rigidity. Something is founded if it is defined in terms of
relationships with other things in a given context. For instance, the
concept of
Reader
is founded since for a
Person
to be a
Reader
there must be something being read. Conversely, a
Person
is not
founded for the reason that its intrinsic properties are defined on
their own regardless of the collaborations with other things.
Something is semantically rigid if its identity directly depends
on being kind of some class. A
Book
is semantically rigid since its
identity is still that of a
Book
regardless someone is reading it or
not. In contrast,
Reader
is not rigid because an entity filling the
role of
Reader
retains its identity outside the context of that role.
For example, a
Person
is a
Reader
while reading a
Book
, but when
it stops reading it, it is still a
Person
.
Therefore, roles are founded, semantically non-rigid types while
entities are non-founded, semantically rigid types.
ROLE-BASED PROCESS MODELING
The proposed approach deals with decomposing the business
process modeling universe into two complementary models, the
business object model and the role model, and later binding these
two models into an integrated specification of the business process
. The business object model deals with the structure and intrinsic
properties of business objects. Here, a process is modeled as a
network of business objects. However, business objects relate to
other business objects in specific contexts and are often used in
more than one context, where they may play different roles. So,
the roles for a business object only need to be included in its definition
when the object acts in the collaboration contexts described
by the roles. It is also impossible to forecast all of the possible
roles of a business object. Thus, adding superfluous roles to the
object impairs several design quality attributes such as understandability
, maintainability and reusability. To deal with such a concern
, roles and business objects should be dealt with separately and
later bound together.
The concept of role allows a system to be decomposed into a set
of business objects capable of clearly separating core parts and
collaboration-dependent parts and then to abstract and compose
such objects. Consequently, a set of roles helps business objects to
be defined to be more reusable and extensible. Roles may also be
reused as an independent unit encapsulating specific collaborations
. Roles are organized into role models, which deal with specifying
the network of related roles required for a collaboration to
happen.
We propose defining and represented both of these models using
the Unified Modeling Language [19] since its graphical syntax and
semantics is well-know by software specialists and, although to a
lesser scale, by business specialists. However, the standard UML
does not have explicit constructs to represent the required business
domain concepts. We make use of the UML extensibility package
to define such concepts. The extensibility package specifies how
UML model elements can be extended and customized with new
graphical representations and new semantics by specifying stereotypes
, tagged values and constraints. A coherent set of such extensions
defined for a specific purpose makes up a UML profile [2,
19]. The next subsections describe how the business object models
and role models are represented.
4.1 The Business Object Model
The business object model specifies the structure and intrinsic
properties of business objects. Business objects are coordinated
towards the achievement of goals that describe why actions occur
. A business process describes how objects are coordinated.
Figure 1. Classes in the business object model profile.
Figure 1 is a class diagram describing the UML stereotypes
(classes in white) that are used in the business object model. A
Business Object
is a UML
Class
and it is specialized as a noun or
verb by means of the
Entity
and
Activity
class stereotypes.
Business object models are represented as UML class diagrams
and the intrinsic behavior of its objects is represented using UML's
behavioral diagrams. Note that collaborations between business
objects are not represented in this model but in the role model.
The stereotypes within the business object model can be summa-rized
as follows:
Business Object
: an abstraction of a concept of interest in the
organization. It is a UML
Class
.
Activity
: a specialization of
Business Object
. It is a verb describing
how a piece of work is performed.
Activities
are performed
by
Actors
, and operate over
Business Objects
, especially those
acting as
Resources
.
Entity
: a specialization of
Business Object
. It is a noun describing
a concrete or abstract business concept.
Resource
: a specialization of
Entity
, which is the input or output
of an
Activity
. It represents things such as materials or information
.
Actor
: a specialization of
Entity
. It is someone (a human actor) or
something (an automated actor, such as an information system
or a production machine) that can perform the actions required
by an
Activity
.
Goal
: a specialization of
Entity
that represents a measurable state
that the organization intends to achieve.
Goals
are achieved by
Business Objects
, especially
Activities
.
A business process is composed of
Activities
that use input
Resources
, such as materials or information, to produce output
Resources
. Nevertheless, the input of an
Activity
may be any other
Business Object
or a composition of
Business Objects
. For instance,
changing or reengineering a business process is in itself a process.
This process takes as input a business object model (i.e. a network
of relationships between business objects) and produces a modified
model. Therefore, the composed business object model is being
used as a resource in this context.
Activities
are performed to achieve specific business
Goals
. Analyzing
Goals
and their relationships with the
Activities
produces an
alignment measure between the processes and the organization's
operational strategy. The
Activities
of a business process are not
1310
autonomous in the sense they require one or more
Actor
or
Business
Support Systems
to perform them.
Actors
represent people,
systems (mechanical or computer based) or a combination of both.
At a large scale, business processes are aggregated into value
chains (which are also business processes) that produce a measurable
value that is visible to external customers.
Figure 2. Example of activity composition and specialization.
Business objects are classes conforming to a type. They can be
specialized and composed just like ordinary objects. Figure 2
shows an example of a class diagram depicting composition and
specialization. Each chevron icon represents an activity or process
as previously defined. The
Sell Product
activity is composed by a
set of sub-activities such as
Identify Customers
and
Handle Order
.
These activities can be further decomposed into actions that are
more refined. The activity
Sell Product
is specialized as
Sell by Mail
Order
and
Sell Online
. Note that composition and specialization do
not imply any collaboration constraints between the activities.
4.2 The Role Model
Roles are a separation of concerns mechanism that allows business
objects to be observed from different perspectives. Role models
identify roles as types and describe the network of roles required
for a specific collaboration to happen.
As a player of a collaboration, a role defines the set of extrinsic
properties and behavior necessary to realize its participating collaborations
.
Figure 3. Representation of a role model package (left). Pair
or related roles (right).
Role models are represented as UML packages with two compartments
(v. Figure 3, left). The bottom compartment of the role
model is a standard UML activity or interaction diagram describing
how the roles are orchestrated. The top compartment of the
package depicts the roles within the role model. Roles are represented
by rounded rectangles, connected by a navigable collaboration
relationship between the roles. The representation of a role
always shows its name. Optionally, it also depicts in parenthesis
the name of the role model to where the role belongs so that its
scope is clearly defined (v. Figure 3, right).
Figure 4 show an example of three role collaborations contained
in two role models. The
Tutorship
role model defines a collaboration
pattern between two roles,
Tutor
and
Student
. In this
Course
role model defines two pairs of collaborations:
Participant
/
Taken
Course
and
Lecturer
/
Given Course
.
Figure 4. Example of role collaborations.
Roles are modeled as classes and represented in class diagrams
Methods and attributes concerning the specific collaboration context
can be specified in the class diagram. Roles can also be constrained
. A constraint asserts conditions between the roles in a role
model. It can be expressed informally or formally (e.g. in plain
text or OCL). An example of a constraint is disallowing two roles
to be played simultaneously by the same player, such as forbidding
an object playing the role of
Tutor
and that of
Student
simultaneously
and in the same context.
Figure 5. Example of role specialization.
Figure 5 is a class diagram that shows how the
Teacher
role is
specialized as
Tutor
and
Lecturer
. Role specialization means that if
a business object is able to play a child role, then it is also able to
play the super role. We have not yet found the need to define abstract
roles, i.e., a role that may only have its non-abstract speciali-zations
instantiated.
4.3 Binding Roles to Objects
Roles are bound to business objects pertaining to a given business
object model. The binding is accomplished via the
«play»
relationship stereotype, which links a business object to a role. It
means the business object is able to exhibit or play the behavior
specified by the target role.
Figure 6. Binding roles to business objects.
Figure 6 shows a class diagram where the pairs of roles
Tutor
/
Student
,
Lecturer
/
Given Course
and
Participant
/
Taken Course
defined
earlier in Figure 4 and Figure 5, are bound to two different
business objects,
Person
and
Course
. The binding between objects
and roles is depicted as a strong arrow. The light arrow represents
the relationships between roles. The model also defines a constraint
in the
Tutorship
role model. It asserts that the instances actually
playing the
Tutor
and
Student
role must be distinct. In this
example, it means the
Person
acting as a
Tutor
and the
Person
acting
as
Student
must be different objects, as expected.
1311
EXAMPLE
Figure 7 shows two base role models,
Supply
and
Pay
and a
composed role model,
Purchase
. Each role is a class and has methods
and attributes concerning the specific collaboration context
(e.g. the
Supplier
role in the
Supply
role model has the inquire and
order methods). The
Purchase
role model describes the collaborations
between a
Client
and a
Supplier
, while the
Pay
role model,
specifies
Payer
and
Payee
.
Figure 7.
Supply
,
Pay
and
Purchase
role models.
Purchase
is
composed of the role model
Supply
and role model
Pay
.
The
Purchase
role model is a composition of the
Supply
and
Pay
role models. A purchase results from supplying a product and paying
for it. Figure 8 shows the binding of the roles within the
Purchase
role model to a set of business objects. In the first case, a
Retailer
acts as the
Client
and
Payer
to a
Producer
who is a
Supplier
and a
Payee
to the
Retailer
. However, the
Retailer
also acts as a
Supplier
(and a
Payee
) to a customer.
Client
(BankClient)
«play»
«play»
«play»
«play»
«play»
«play»
Supplier
(Purchase)
Client
(Purchase)
Supplier
(Purchase)
Client
(Purchase)
«business object»
Customer
Payer
(Purchase)
Payee
(Purchase)
«business object»
Bank B
Banker
(BankClient)
Payer
(Purchase)
«play»
Payee
(Purchase)
«business object»
Bank A
Banker
(BankClient)
Client
(BankClient)
«play»
«business object»
Producer
«business object»
Retailer
Figure 8. Binding roles to business objects.
CONCLUSIONS
This paper has presented the fundamental concepts towards a
conceptual object-oriented framework for role-based business
process modeling. It relies on defining two distinct models. The
business object model focus on describing the components of a
business process (activities, goals, resources and actors) as business
objects. This model depicts the type of each business object,
its intrinsic behavior and properties but does not address the representation
of the object's features that are related to its collaborations
with other objects.
The role model depicts the collaborative behavior between roles
and the constraints that regulate them. Roles are bound to business
objects in a specific business object model, thus defining their
usage context. This model describes roles as types on their own
that can be specialized and aggregated. Role reuse is possible
whenever the semantics of the interaction pattern is the same, regardless
of the interaction context.
The proposed approach separates the specification of the intrinsic
features of a business object from its extrinsic features, meaning
that the properties and behavior that arise from the collaborations
with other objects are separated from the properties concerning
the object. This separation results in an increase of the understandability
of the business process since each different aspect of
the business object may be discussed, analyzed and dealt with
separately.
Additionally roles also contribute to keep the alignment between
the multiple organizational levels where a business process is defined
. When a business object specified at business level is
mapped to a component at business process support systems level,
roles provide information on how to design the component so that
changes to other levels can be traced and managed. Since the collaborative
aspects of a business object are specified outside the
object as roles, changes to a business process only interfere with
the roles which derive from the corresponding activities, leaving
the intrinsic properties of the object and its remaining roles un-changed
. This means that only the implementation of the concerned
roles needs modifications. The same reasoning applies the
other way around. When the implementation of a specific role or
business object is changed due to technical modifications or to the
evolution of the software, these changes can be traced up to the
processes and goals depending on it.
The value of using role modeling increases with the need of
making explicit the patterns of interaction between business objects
. This is the case of processes where its business objects relate
to several other business objects. In this case, understanding and
reengineering such a process is often difficult due to the number of
dependencies between objects, which are not separated or organized
according to the interaction context. This also makes difficult
to abstract common behavior patterns so that the business process
elements may be reused in other contexts.
We are currently extending this framework to enhance the representation
of the interaction between business objects and the
corresponding business support systems. The goal is to analyze the
gap between the existing human skills and information system
services of an organization and the requirements imposed by the
as-is and to-be business models so that the alignment between
these two levels may be improved.
REFERENCES
1.
W.Aalst, K.Hee, Workflow Management, MIT Press, 2002.
2.
S.Alhir, Unified Modeling Language Extension Mechanisms,
Distributed Computing, 1998.
3.
C. Bachman, M. Daya. The role concept in data models,
Proceedings of the 3
rd
International Conference on VLDB,
1977.
4.
B. Biddle, E. Thomas, Role Theory, Concepts and Research,
Kluwer Publishers, 1979.
1312
5.
Y. Chan, Why Haven't We Mastered Alignment?: The
Importance of the Informal Organization Structure, MISQ
Executive, Vol.1, No.2, 2002.
6.
B.
Curtis,
M.
Kelner,
J.
Over,
Process
Modeling,
Communications of the ACM, Vol. 35, No. 9, 1992.
7.
T. Davenport, J. Short, The New Industrial Engineering:
Information Technology and Business Process Redesign.
Sloan Management Review, 1990.
8.
H. Eertink, W. Janssen, P. Luttighuis, W. Teeuw, C. Vissers, A
Business Process Design Language, World Congress on
Formal Methods, Springer, 1999, pp. 76-95.
9.
H. Eriksson, M. Penker, Business Modeling with UML, OMG
Press, 2001.
10. G. Gottlob, M. Schrefl, B. Röck, Extending Object-Oriented
Systems with Roles, ACM Transactions on Information
Systems, Vol, 14, 1996 pp. 268-296.
11. N. Guarino, M. Carrara, and P. Giaretta. An ontology of meta-level
categories. Proceedings of the Fourth International
Conference on Knowledge Representation and Reasoning,
pages 270­280. Morgan Kaufmann, 1994.
12. T. Halpin, Augmenting UML with Fact-orientation, 34th
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, IEEE
Press, Hawaii, USA, 2001.
13. ISO, ISO/IEC 10746 ODP Reference Model, International
Standards Organization, 1995.
14. E. Kendall, Agent Roles and Role Models, New Abstractions
for Multiagent System Analysis and Design, International
Workshop on Intelligent Agents, 1998.
15. B. Kristiansen, Object-Oriented Modeling with Roles,  1
st
Conference on Object Information Systems, 1996.
16. M. Madhavji, The Process Cycle, Software Engineering
Journal, Vol. 6, No. 5, 1991.
17. C. McGowan, L. Bohmer, Model-based business process
improvement, 15thInternational Conference on Software
Engineering, IEEE Computer Society Press, 1993.
18. D. Miers, Business Process Engineering, C-T Colin, Kogan
Page, London, 1996.
19. OMG, Unified Modeling Language Specification, Version 1.5,
formal/03-03-01, 2003.
20. OMG, Business Object Management Special Interest Group
(BOMSIG) Glossary of Terms, 1995.
21. M. Ould, Business Processes, Modeling and Analysis for
Reengineering and Improvement, John Wiley & Sons, 1995.
22. A. Scheer, ARIS ­ Business Process Modeling, 2
nd
edition,
Springer, 1999.
23. T. Reenskaug et al., Working With Objects: The OOram
Software Engineering Method. ManningPublication Co.,
1996.
24. B. Singh, G. Rein. Role Interaction Nets (RINs): A Process
Description Formalism, MCC, 1992
25. D. Taylor, Business Engineering with Object Technology,
John Wiley & Sons, 1995.
26. R. Turner, Strategy for Developing an Integrated Role Theory.
Humboldt Journal of Sociology and Religion 7: 123-139,
1979.
27. M. Uschold, M. King, S. Moralee, Y. Zorgios, The Enterprise
Ontology, The Knowledge Engineering Review, Vol. 13,
1998.
28. E. Verharen, A Language-Action Perspective on the Design of
Cooperative Information Agents, CIP-Gegevens Koninklijke
Biibliotheek, 1997.
29. T. Walford,
Business
Process
Implementation
for
IT
Professionals and Managers, Arthech House, MA, 1999.
30. E. Yourdon, Modern Structured Analysis, Prentice-Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1989.
31. Workflow Management Coalition, The Workflow Reference
Model, 1995
1313
