A Database Security Course on a Shoestring
ABSTRACT
Database security has paramount importance in industrial,
civilian and government domains. Despite its importance,
our search reveals that only a small number of database security
courses are being offered. In this paper, we share
our experience in developing and offering an undergraduate
elective course on database security with limited resources.
We believe that database security should be considered in
its entirety rather than being component specific. Therefore
, we emphasize that students develop and implement
a database security plan for a typical real world application
. In addition to the key theoretical concepts, students
obtain hands-on experience with two popular database systems
. We encourage students to learn independently making
use of the documentation and technical resources freely
available on the Internet. This way, our hope is that they
will be able to adapt to emerging systems and application
scenarios.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.2.7 [DATABASE MANAGEMENT]: Database Administration
--security, integrity, and protection;
K.3.2 [COMPUTERS AND EDUCATION]: Computer
and Information Science Education--curriculum.
General Terms
Security.

INTRODUCTION
Database systems are designed to provide efficient access
to large volumes of data. However, many application
domains require that the data access be restricted for security
reasons.
For example, an unauthorized access to
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
SIGCSE'06, March 1­5, 2006, Houston, Texas, USA.
Copyright 2006 ACM 1-59593-259-3/06/0003...
$
5.00.
a bank database can potentially cost millions of dollars.
The federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act (HIPAA) regulates the disclosure of information from a
patient database, allowing access to health care providers,
health plans, and health care clearinghouses, simultaneously
protecting the privacy of patients. For obvious reasons, a
Department of Defense (DoD) database needs to be protected
from unauthorized access. Since many organizations
increasingly entrust their information resources with database
systems, in today's highly networked environment, the
sensitive information can be at high risk unless there are security
mechanisms in place to protect the data at the source
itself. However, a large number of databases are incorrectly
installed, configured, and maintained. This, in part, may be
attributed to the lack of database security education in our
computer science programs. We feel that a new undergraduate
course on database security will help our students face
the ever increasing challenges in this field.
Our search shows that, despite the importance, only a
handful database security courses are being offered. Most
of the courses we found are graduate courses and are highly
theoretical. We also found a few extension program courses,
which are product specific.
Although a large number of
database courses exist at both undergraduate and graduate
levels, we feel that, one reason for not offering database
security courses may be the scarcity of textbooks, reference
materials, and other resources.
Realizing the importance of database security in computer
science curriculum, [8] proposes adding a new module to the
basic database course. Since the basic database course has
already many topics to cover, we feel that the addition of
new material will not completely serve the purpose. Further,
we find it difficult to incorporate hands-on component to
such a course. Similarly, a computer security course is too
broad in scope, and rarely includes database security topics.
Therefore, we decided to develop a new undergraduate level
elective on database security. This paper is based on our
experience of offering a database security course in Spring
2005. We have adjusted the contents and assignments in
response to the feedback and course outcome. The modified
version is presented here.
Since many of our students seek industrial positions after
graduation, we have designed our course to meet their needs
with the right blend of theory and practice. The course objective
is to develop an understanding of security aspects
of databases, database administration, and database supported
applications. We collected information from alumni
as well as potential employers before finalizing the contents.
7
Although students were expected to gain hands-on experience
with some popular databases in our course, we tried to
focus on concepts rather than just syntax or product specific
features. Often, students were asked to learn software packages
on their own by reading the product documentation.
We also offered an online feedback page for receiving anonymous
student comments, which helped us know if students
needed additional assistance. By encouraging students to
learn and experiment on their own, we hope that they can
easily apply the learned concepts to emerging application
scenarios.
This is particularly needed since today's work
environment expects agility from employees to quickly master
and develop software systems. To facilitate participation
further, we asked students to research and make presentations
choosing from a set of specified topics. Most impor-tantly
, since many of our educational institutions are cash
strapped, we designed our course to execute with a small
budget.
In the next section, we detail topics, which may be included
in a database security course, with references that,
we hope, will be useful for other instructors. We also discuss
labs and assignments in detail. Finally, we conclude the
paper with an account of lessons learned and future possibilities
DATABASE SECURITY TOPICS
Although a large number of topics can be included, we try
to focus on a few important ones that, in our judgment, are
likely to be immediately useful after graduation. We also include
topics on securing the data within a database, as well
as the security of database systems and operating systems
as suggested in [8]. Our position is that database security
should be considered in whole rather than adopting a piecemeal
approach. However, we recognize that, in practice, it
is often easy to overlook some aspects of database security.
Therefore, we recommend that students develop a database
security plan. We also include other relevant topics such as
statistical database security, and security and privacy issues
of data mining. Table 1 shows the schedule of topics for a
typical sixteen week semester course on database security.
Major labs and assignments are given in Table 2.
The course begins with an "Introduction to database se-curity"
, where the objective is to highlight the importance
of database security and to motivate students to learn the
rest of the topics.
2.1
Introducing Database Security
One way to emphasize the importance of database security
would be to reflect on the impact of not having security at
all in application domains such as military, medical, financial
, credit card, credit file, driving records, and insurance
databases. Students may survey the incidents of database
security breaches and evaluate the efforts to ensure database
security by industry and government.
Since database security is a combination of database technology
and computer security, basics of both will be helpful
. A discussion on security properties such as confiden-tiality
, integrity, availability and non-repudiation should be
included.
Although an in-depth study of cryptography is not within
the scope of this course, basics of secret key cryptography
and public key cryptography will benefit students. A good
reference book we found is "Data Security and Cryptogra-Week
Topic
1
Course Overview and Introduction to Database
Security, Basics of Data Security and Cryptography
2
Overview of Security Models
3
Access Control Models,
Covert Channels and Inference Channels
4
MySQL Security
5
Oracle Security
6
Oracle Label Security
7
Developing a Database Security Plan
8
Spring Break
9
SQL Server Security
10
Security of Statistical Databases
11
Security and privacy issues of Data Mining
12
Database Applications Security,
SQL Injection,
Defensive Programming
13
Database Intrusion Prevention, Audit,
Fault Tolerance and Recovery
14
Hippocratic Databases,
XML Security
15
Network Security,
Biometrics
16
Final Examination Week
Table 1: Course Schedule
phy" by Dorothy Denning [5]. Digital signatures, digital certificates
and Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) [21] are other
topics to consider.
An overview of security and integrity models [4] will also
be helpful at this point.
This is the best time to introduce
the computer security lingo such as subjects and objects.
The difference between widely used access control techniques
may also be highlighted.
2.2
Access Control
Discretionary Access Control (DAC) mechanisms such as
capabilities, profiles, access control lists, passwords, and permission
bits may be discussed. Here we also introduce the
operating system security aspects (using Windows
R
and
Linux environments), and how they impact database security
in general. Although details are not required until
we introduce Oracle security, overview of Role-Based Access
Control (RBAC) [6, 18] may be discussed.
Unlike the above access control techniques, in Mandatory
Access Control (MAC) the security is enforced by the system
as dictated in the security policy, not by the owner of
an object. Although there are many security models suggested
for providing Mandatory security, Bell-LaPadula [2]
model is probably the simplest to learn. Even when a system
enforces Mandatory Access Control, information leakage
through covert channels [11] and inference channels [13]
may still be possible. A few examples will help students understand
how the information leakage can take place through
such means.
Databases enforcing MAC often assign security classification
levels for objects and security clearance levels for
subjects. Access control is performed by the system based
on these levels. A lab may be developed, where students
8
simulate a multilevel database on an ordinary database system
. This means students will have to modify the schema to
add additional fields for storing security classification levels.
They also develop views for users having different clearance
levels. Further, to support poly-instantiation, the primary
key will have to be redefined to include security level to accommodate
the possibility of the same key values existing
at multiple security levels.
Another topic of interest would be to explore how the Discretionary
Access Control and the Mandatory Access Control
can be combined and applied in some scenarios.
2.3
Securing Real Life Databases
The candidate database systems we chose for hands-on
experience were MySQL
TM
, Oracle
R
, and Microsoft
R
SQL
Server
TM
. Because of time constraints, students were able
to focus only on the first two databases, but an overview of
SQL server security was also provided.
2.3.1
MySQL Security
With more than six million installations worldwide [14],
the simplicity and open source architecture make MySQL,
probably, the first database to study. The primary source
of information would be the MySQL manual itself (available
from MySQL site [14]), particularly the section on "MySQL
Access Privilege System". Another source, MySQL Security
Handbook [22], explains MySQL security system and
provides a few practical examples.
Labs/Assignments
1 Multilevel Security ­ Poly-instantiation
2 MySQL Grant Privilege System
3 SQL Injection
4 Oracle Security ­ Basic Lab
5 Database Security Plan Development
6 Backend Development for B2C Application
7 Probability Distributions, Sampling
8 Statistical Databases - Breach of Security
9 Statistical Databases - Inference Protection Techniques
10 Data Mining Security - Reading and Presentation
Table 2: Major Labs/Assignments
MySQL Access Privilege System authenticates a user based
on user name, host name, and password. Further, it ensures
that users perform only permitted operations based on the
privileges specified in the grant tables (namely, user, db,
and host). The format and contents of these tables, therefore
, are of particular importance. Since most of the critical
information including the grant tables are stored on a default
database named mysql, the security of mysql database
is also crucial. Students should learn to apply the "principle
of least privilege" when granting privileges in order to
perform the task at hand.
Each student was given a MySQL instance with root level
access. Students were asked to create users and assign privileges
while monitoring the privilege tables for changes. Students
also experimented with the privilege system by man-ually
modifying privilege tables.
We created two person
administrator-user teams for enabling the students to experience
the system from both perspectives. Users were assigned
certain tasks to perform. Some of the tasks given
were specifically designed to understand the limitations of
the MySQL privilege system. The role of the administrators
was to grant privileges just sufficient for users to perform
the task. Users could access the system in any manner they
wish ­ in fact, users will be encouraged to expose the weaknesses
in the privilege assignments. The administrators, on
the other hand, controlled access based on need-to-know, at
the same time trying not to be too restrictive for users to
perform the required tasks. We found the users very excited
to expose security weaknesses in the privilege assignment.
Although administrators were a little embarrassed, they too
were motivated by the exercise. For the the next lab session,
students switched roles, i.e., those who were administrators
became users and vice versa.
MySQL supports data security by providing functions such
as ENCRYPT, DES ENCRYPT, AES ENCRYPT, PASSWORD
, OLD PASSWORD and ENCODE. Since these functions
may not be safe under all circumstances, it would be
useful to highlight the unsafe scenarios.
Students may also learn how to use SSL for security, and
simultaneously make sure that the system performance is
not significantly impacted. Also useful would be to study
how the authentication requirements may vary when using
options such as REQUIRE SSL, REQUIRE ISSUER and
REQUIRE X509. Even when using SSL, the data security
can depend on the type of cipher and the key lengths used.
Therefore, students may learn how to specify these parameters
using the REQUIRE CIPHER option.
Some privileges in MySQL, if not carefully used, can expose
the system to high security risk. For example, FILE
privilege may be misused to gain access to the system. Hence,
a comprehensive study of unsafe privileges will be extremely
useful.
Even when the privilege system is correctly set up and
maintained the entire privilege system can be circumvented
using a MySQL startup option like --skip-grant-tables.
On the other hand, some startup options make the server
safer. Therefore, MySQL startup options and their security
consequences must be discussed.
Many web applications have MySQL database server deployed
as the backend, and HTML based form acting as the
front end. Since user input is used to generate SQL queries
to interact with the database, if unchecked, malicious users
or programs can inject unsafe SQL queries. Basic concepts
of preventing SQL injection may also be discussed.
Students
may be asked to analyze a number of SQL queries for
potential vulnerability.
Other topics, which can be included are: using MySQL
network scanner to detect MySQL servers on the network
with default passwords, MySQL resource control, data backup
and recovery, auditing, and firewalls.
2.3.2
Planning Database Security
Since enforcing database security is extremely complex
task with a large number of factors affecting the security of
a database, the best way to approach the problem would
be to systematically develop and implement a comprehensive
database security plan. Therefore, in our course, we
required that students develop a database security plan for
a small Business-to-Consumer (B2C) E-Commerce application
. See [19] Ch7 (available online) for detailed exposition
on database security planning. Although the text is on Oracle
security, the concepts can be applied to any database.
9
2.3.3
Oracle Security
For security reasons, the computer science department
was reluctant to grant administrative privileges to students
on our Oracle server. Therefore, we ended up creating a
separate Oracle instance for the course. For each student,
we created one administrative account with DBA privileges,
and then the students were allowed to create user accounts
as needed, provided they follow a naming convention to
avoid conflicting names.
In addition to Oracle Security
Handbook [12], we found the Oracle Database Administrators
Guide [15] also useful. The guide is available online
from the Oracle Database Documentation Library.
First, we had an Oracle Security Basics Lab. Students
were introduced to the Oracle security system through a
series of tasks. The next lab was more advanced, and built
up on the database security plan developed in a previous
assignment.
The task was to develop the backend for a
small B2C E-Commerce application. Students were asked
to create user accounts, roles, tables, views and triggers as
required. The privileges were to be assigned by observing
the "principle of least privilege", as per the security plan.
Further, students may also be trained to perform some
standard checks for security such as checking for default user
accounts, default passwords, users having excessive privileges
(e.g., DBA, ALTER SYSTEM, CREATE LIBRARY,
CREATE ANY TRIGGER), security impact of WITH AD-MIN
and WITH GRANT options on privileges, EXTER-NALLY
authenticated users, and the existence of database
links. Students may also learn how to display information on
items such as triggers, views and externally authenticated
users. A section on security issues of using default Oracle
supplied roles will be useful.
Other topics to include are: Transparent Network Substrate
(TNS) security and listener management from remote
machines and setting up listener passwords, buffer overflow
attacks and prevention, auditing, and undocumented Oracle
features. Students may also be introduced to reading security
advisories and obtaining Oracle Critical Patch Updates
(CPU).
Recently, a large number of security breaches have been
reported.
Interestingly, however, many of these breaches
were incidents of missing or stolen backup storage devices.
Therefore, we feel appropriate to include a session on security
and protection needs of exports, cold backups, hot
backups, and disaster recovery sites.
2.3.4
Oracle Label Security
Oracle Label Security provides built-in row level access
control for high security applications. Essentially, Oracle
adds a new field to each row for storing the row's sensitivity
labels. Row access is granted or denied by comparing the
user's identity and security clearance label with the row's
sensitivity labels. Earlier, in Assignment 1, students have
simulated a multilevel database. Therefore, the above concepts
should be easy to learn at this point.
As a source of information on Oracle Label Security Architecture
, we used Oracle Label Security Administrator's
Guide [16]. We covered levels, compartments, groups, session
and row labels, label security algorithm, and management
of label security using Oracle Internet Dictionary.
2.3.5
Microsoft SQL Server Security
As we mentioned earlier at the beginning of this section,
due to time constraints, we could not provide an extensive
coverage of Microsoft SQL Server. We briefly discussed
SQL Server security model, authentication mechanisms, authentication
modes, and good security practices for SQL
servers. Students presented information they gathered on
SQL server vulnerabilities, security breaches, and prevention
techniques. We found a few excellent articles on SQLServer-Central
.com, an online community of DBAs, developers, and
SQL server users.
We also found SQL Server Developer
Center (http://msdn.microsoft.com/sql) useful in providing
a large number of resources in this area.
2.4
Statistical Security
As for the rest of the course, this section is application
oriented, giving the students the gist of the concepts they
need to know and then putting them to work in the context
of a real database. Thus, the first lab is a simulation based
assignment designed as an introduction to probability distributions
, expectation, spread, sampling methods, and sampling
distributions of relevant statistics. We find that, even
for students with prior coursework in probability and statistics
, an assignment of this type is very beneficial. The second
lab presents the task of setting up a sequence of queries, so
that students can extract from a database what should have
been secure information.
At this point we introduce the
main conceptual techniques for inference protection such as
the lattice model and partitioning the database entities into
populations. See [4], Ch 5 for details. The third major assignment
aims at teaching inference protection techniques.
Given a database, the students are asked to answer queries
without disclosing sensitive information by applying restriction
, perturbation, and combined techniques.
2.5
Security Issues of Data Mining
Data mining may be misused to obtain confidential information
from a database. So we believe, a course on database
security should include an overview of security and privacy
concerns of data mining. Organizations would like to share
the data for operational convenience, at the same time prevent
the mining of data for information they do not want to
disclose. Likewise, private individuals would like to submit
their personal information for data mining without compromising
their privacy while keeping the key association rules
intact. Secure data mining techniques appear similar to statistical
security methods, however, their computational efficiency
is a major concern. We found a number of interesting
papers [3, 17, 20] that can be used for reading assignments
and group discussions.
2.6
Other Topics
Malicious users may bypass security mechanisms provided
by an application by directly connecting to the database.
Therefore, whenever possible stored procedures, and views
must be used for providing data access. Database application
security and defensive programming was briefly covered
. Semi-structured nature of Extensible Markup Language
(XML) documents make them ideal candidates for
use in many applications including E-Business. Therefore,
XML [7] security was also discussed.
10
Other topics of interest are: database intrusion detection
and prevention [17], database fault tolerance and recovery,
Hippocratic databases [1], network security [10], and biometrics
[9].
RELATED COURSES
Department of Computer Science at University of Alberta
has offered an independent study on database security with
topics such as security models, security mechanisms, intrusion
detection systems, and statistical database protection.
University of Maryland University College has a graduate
level course on database security with theory and applications
, including frameworks for discretionary and mandatory
access control, data integrity, availability and performance,
secure database design, data aggregation, data inference, secure
concurrency control, and secure transaction processing.
University of South Carolina and George Mason University
offer graduate level elective courses on Database Security.
Similar courses are offered at a few other institutions, but we
do not discuss them here due to space constraints. Among
the undergraduate courses we found, the closest one to what
we offered is taught at University of Arkansas Little Rock. It
provides database security theory and background on Oracle
security environment.
CONCLUSIONS
Our new undergraduate elective course on database security
covers basic concepts and provides practical experience
on two popular databases. We emphasized that students develop
a database security plan that, we hope, will encourage
them to view the problem of ensuring database security as a
task that needs to be carefully planned in whole rather than
something that can be addressed in parts.
The initial offering of the course had "Data Structures"
as the only pre-requisite, because we wanted to keep the
course open to a larger audience. Students, in general, were
found be more motivated to follow through on course work
than other courses we have taught. We received excellent
numerical score as well as comments from students in the
departmental student evaluations. We had a good mixture
of students. All were computer science majors, and forty
seven percent were honors students. Sixty seven percent of
the class completed the course with an overall score of 80%
or higher with all honors students falling into this category.
However, it was felt that a few students lacked basics to
fully grasp the material. Therefore, having a basic database
technology course as the pre-requisite will help cover more
of the suggested topics in depth.
In closing, we hope that our experience shared herein will
help other instructors develop and offer a similar course on
database security with limited resources.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Agrawal, J. Kiernan, R. Srikant, and Y. Xu.
Hippocratic Databases. In Proc. of the Very Large
Data Bases (VLDB) Conference, Hong Kong, China,
August 2002.
[2] D. Bell and L. LaPadula. Secure Computer Systems:
Mathematical Foundations. Technical Report
ESD-TR-73-278, MITRE Corporation, 1973.
[3] C. Clifton and D. Marks. Security and Privacy
Implications of Data Mining. In Workshop on Data
Mining and Knowledge Discovery, Montreal, Canada,
February 1996.
[4] S. Castano, M. G. Fugini, G. Martella, and
P. Samarati. Database Security. Addison-Wesley &
ACM Press, 1995.
[5] D. E. Denning. Cryptography and Data Security.
Addison-Wesley, 1982.
[6] D. Ferraiolo and R. Kuhn. Role-Based Access
Controls. In Proc. 15th NIST-NCSC National
Computer Security Conference, Baltimore, MD,
October 1992.
[7] B. Dournaee. XML Security. RSA Press, Berkeley,
CA, USA, 2002.
[8] M. Guimaraes, H. Mattord, and R. Austin.
Incorporating Security Components into Database
Courses. In Proc. of the InfoSecCD Conference'04,
Kennesaw, GA, September 2004.
[9] A. Jain, L. Hong, and S. Pankanti. Biometric
Identification. Commun. ACM, 43(2), 2000.
[10] C. Kaufman, R. Perlman, and M. Speciner. Network
Security: Private Communication in a Public World,
Second Edition. Prentice-Hall, 2002.
[11] B. W. Lampson. A Note on the Confinement Problem.
Commun. ACM, 16(10), October 1973.
[12] M. Theriault and A. Newman. Oracle Security
Handbook : Implement a Sound Security Plan in Your
Oracle Environment. Osborne McGraw-Hill, 2001.
[13] M. Morgenstern. Security and Inference in Multi-Level
Database and Knowledge-Base Systems. In ACM
SIGMOD Conf. on the Management of Data, San
Francisco, CA, May 1987.
[14] http://www.mysql.com.
[15] Oracle Database Administrator's Guide. Oracle
Corporation, 2001.
[16] Oracle Label Security Administrator's Guide. Oracle
Corporation, 2003.
[17] R. Agrawal and R. Srikant. Privacy-preserving Data
Mining. In Proc. of the ACM SIGMOD Conference on
Management of Data, Dallas, TX, May 2000.
[18] R. Sandhu and Q. Munawer. How to do Discretionary
Access Control Using Roles. In RBAC '98:
Proceedings of the third ACM workshop on Role-based
access control, Fairfax, VA, 1998.
[19] M. Theriault and W. Heney. Oracle Security. O'Reilly
& Associates, Inc., 1998.
[20] V. Verykios, E. Bertino, I. Fovino, L. Provenza, Y.
Saygin and Y. Theodoridis. State-of-the-art in Privacy
Preserving Data Mining. SIGMOD Record, 33(1),
2004.
[21] W. Ford and M. S. Baum. Secure Electronic
Commerce: Building the Infrastructure for Digital
Signatures and Encryption. Prentice Hall, 2000.
[22] Wrox Author Team. MySQL Security Handbook. Wrox
Press, 2003.
11

