Implementing the IT Fundamentals Knowledge Area
ABSTRACT
The recently promulgated IT model curriculum contains IT 
fundamentals as one of its knowledge areas. It is intended to give 
students a broad understanding of (1) the IT profession and the 
skills that students must develop to become successful IT 
professionals and (2) the academic discipline of IT and its 
relationship to other disciplines. As currently defined, the IT 
fundamentals knowledge area requires 33 lecture hours to 
complete. 
The model curriculum recommends that the material relevant to 
the IT fundamentals knowledge area be offered early in the 
curriculum, for example in an introduction to IT course; however, 
many institutions will have to include additional material in an 
introductory IT course. For example, the Introduction of IT course 
at Georgia Southern University is used to introduce students to 
the available second disciplines (an important part of the Georgia 
Southern IT curriculum aimed at providing students with in-depth 
knowledge of an IT application domain), some productivity tools, 
and SQL. 
For many programs there may be too much material in an 
introductory IT course. This paper describes how Georgia 
Southern University resolved this dilemma.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
K.3.3 [Computer and Information Science Education]: 
Curriculum

General Terms
: Human Factors

INTRODUCTION
The recently promulgated IT Model Curriculum, available at 
http://sigite.acm.org/activities/curriculum/, consists of 12 knowledge
areas including IT fundamentals (ITF). ITF is intended to 
provide students with a set of foundation skills and provide an 
overview of the discipline of IT and its relationship to other 
computing disciplines. It is also intended to help students
understand the diverse contexts in which IT is used and the 
challenges inherent in the diffusion of innovative technology. 
Given its foundational nature, it will not come as a surprise that 
the model curriculum recommends that ITF is covered early in a 
student's program of study, and it seems most logical that this 
knowledge area be covered in an introductory course in a 
baccalaureate program in IT. 
The IT Model curriculum recommends a minimum coverage of 33 
lecture hours for the ITF knowledge area; however, a typical 3-credit
semester course gives an instructor, at most, 45 lecture 
hours, and many programs will have to include additional material 
in an introductory course. For example, an important element of 
the IT program at Georgia Southern University is the inclusion of 
second disciplines, coherent sets of 7 courses in an IT application 
area, such as electronic broadcasting, law enforcement, music 
technology, and supply chain management ([5], [6]). Since 
students must begin introductory courses in their second 
discipline relatively early in their academic program, it is 
important that they be exposed to the range of second disciplines 
available to them early, and the most appropriate place to do this 
is in the introductory IT course. Also, students enrolling in the 
introductory IT course at Georgia Southern are not expected to 
have taken a computer literacy course beforehand, and it has 
become clear that many are weak in the use of spreadsheets. Since 
the program strongly believes that IT graduates can be expected to 
be conversant with basic productivity tools, including 
spreadsheets, the course must cover the basics of spreadsheet 
application. Finally, the introductory IT course must also provide 
a basic coverage of SQL, because the web design course, which 
covers n-tier architectures and requires a basic knowledge of SQL, 
is taught before the data management course in which SQL is 
normally presented. 
While the additional material that has to be covered in an 
introductory IT course is likely to differ between institutions, it is 
likely that many, if not all, IT programs will have to cover some 
additional material. Given that ITF already requires 33 lecture 
hours, considerable pressure is placed  upon instructors in 
introductory IT courses to cover both the ITF material and 
whatever additional material needs to be included. 
The intent of this paper is to describe how this particular dilemma 
was resolved at Georgia Southern University. Section 2 provides 
more details about the IT fundamentals knowledge area, while 
section 3 discusses the introduction to IT course offered at 
Georgia Southern University. Section 4 concludes.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
SIGITE 05, October 20­22, 2005, Newark, NJ, USA. 
Copyright 2005 ACM 1-59593-252-6/05/0010...$5.00.

1
THE IT FUNDAMENTALS KNOWLEDGE AREA
The IT Model Curriculum follows the example set by the 
Computer Science model curriculum (http://www.acm.org/ 
education/curricula.html) and distinguishes between a number of 
knowledge areas, each consisting of a number of knowledge units. 
Knowledge units are themselves composed of topics and learning 
outcomes. For reasons explained in ([4]), the IT model curriculum 
differs from the computer science model curriculum in that it 
distinguishes between core learning outcomes, which every 
graduate from an IT program is expected to achieve, and elective 
learning outcomes, which only graduates specializing in this area 
are expected to achieve. Given the foundational nature of ITF, it 
should come as no surprise that ITF only has core learning 
outcomes associated with it. 
Below are listed the knowledge units and the core learning 
outcomes associated with each. The number behind each 
knowledge unit is the minimum recommended coverage expressed 
in lecture hours.  
ITF1. Pervasive themes in IT (17)
1.  Describe the components of IT systems and their
interrelationships.
2.  Describe how complexity occurs in IT. 
3.  Recognize that an IT professional must know how to
manage complexity.
4.  List examples of tools and methods used in IT for
managing complexity.
5.  Describe the role of the IT professional as the user
advocate.
6. Explain why life-long learning and continued
professional development is critical for an IT 
professional.
7.  Explain why adaptability and interpersonal skills are
important to an IT professional.
8.  Distinguish between data and information, and describe
the interrelationship.
9.  Describe the importance of data and information in IT. 
10. Explain why the mastery of information and
communication technologies is important to an IT 
professional.
11.  Explain why the IAS perspective needs to pervade all
aspects of IT.
ITF2. Organizational Issues (6)
1.  Describe the elements of a feasible IT application. 
2.  Identify the extent and activities involved in an IT
application.
3.  Understand the requirements of the business processes. 
4.  Outline the project management processes. 
5.  List the integration processes.
ITF3. History of IT (3)
1.  Outline the history of computing technology. 
2.  Describe significant impacts of computing on society. 
3.  Describe significant changes in human-computer
interaction.
4.  4.    Outline the history of the Internet.
ITF4. IT and its related and informing disciplines (3)
1.  Define "Information Technology." 
2.  Describe the relationship between IT and other
computing disciplines.
3.  Describe the relationship between IT and non-computing
disciplines.
4.  Explain why mathematics and statistics are important in
IT.
ITF5. Application domains (2)
1.  Describe the application of IT in non-computing
disciplines.
2.  Describe how IT has impacted almost all aspects of
modern living.
3.  Describe ways and extents in which IT has changed the
interaction and communication in our society.
4.
Describe how IT has impacted the globalization of 
world economy, culture, political systems, health, 
security, warfare, etc
.
ITF6. Application of math and statistics to IT (2)
1.  Recognize the foundation of IT is built upon the various
aspects of mathematics.
2.  Understand the number systems used in computation. 
3.  Explain data representation and encoding systems. 
4.  Describe the current encryption methods and their
limitations.
5.  Describe the pervasive usage of mathematical concepts,
such as functions, relations, sets as well as basic logic 
used in programming.
6.  Recognize the value of probability and statistics. 
7.  Describe the basic data analysis concepts and methods
used in IT applications.
The total minimum recommended coverage thus is 33 lecture 
hours.
THE INTRODUCTION TO IT COURSE AT GEORGIA SOUTHERN UNIVERSITY
The introduction to IT course (IT 1130) offered in the Department 
of IT at Georgia Southern University is designed to introduce 
students to IT as a discipline and cover some productivity tools, 
namely Excel and Access. In line with all other IT courses at 
Georgia Southern University, IT 1130 was formulated through a 
set of explicit learning outcomes. The learning outcomes for IT 
1130 are
1.  Demonstrate a basic understanding of the field of IT,
including the ability to  
i.
Define the term "Information Technology";
ii.  Recognize the disciplines that have contributed to the
emergence of IT, namely computer science, information 
systems, and computer engineering;
iii.  Identify areas in which IT has significantly impacted
individuals, organizations and/or societies.
2.  Demonstrate an understanding of basic information
technology software applications, including the ability to  
i.
Using a given specification, create a simple database;
ii.  Use SQL for simple queries; 
iii.   Use an office productivity suite.
The overlap between Objective 1 and the ITF Knowledge Area is 
significant; however, due to Objective 2, the introductory IT 
course at Georgia Southern must cover significant additional 
material not specified in the IT fundamentals knowledge area.
2
3.2  Course Outline and its Mapping to the IT 
Fundamentals Knowledge Area
The Introduction to IT course at Georgia Southern consists of 45 
lecture hours. Teaching productivity tools, Learning Outcome 2 
listed in Section 3.1, accounts for roughly 9 hours of instruction. 
Exams conducted during the semester account for 3 hours of 
instruction. This leaves 33 lecture hours to cover the remaining 
topics for IT 1130 relating to Learning Outcome 1 listed in 
Section 3.1. Table 1 provides a breakdown of the topics covered 
in the remaining 33 hours of instruction, the number of lecture 
hours spent on that topic, as well as the learning outcome in the 
IT fundamentals knowledge area of the model curriculum to 
which the topic corresponds.
TABLE 1: IT 1130 Topics and ITF Learning Outcomes
IT 1130 Topic
Objective  # Hours
1 Define IT
ITF4.1
1
2 Data and Information
ITF1.8 
ITF1.9
1
3 Components of IT Systems
·
Hardware
·
Software
·
Networks
·
User
ITF1.1 8.5
4 Core Technologies
·
Data Management
·
Networking
·
Web Systems
·
SAD
·
Programming
·
HCI
·
Specializations in 
BSIT
ITF1.10
ITF2.1 
ITF2.2 
ITF2.3 
ITF2.4 
ITF2.5
8.5
5 Related Disciplines
ITF4.2 
ITF4.3 
ITF4.4
2
6 Application Domains 
  (Second Disciplines in BSIT)
ITF5.1 
ITF5.2 
ITF5.3
ITF 5.4 
ITF 3.2
7
7 History of IT
ITF3.1 
ITF3.4
1
8 Viruses, Crime, Law, 
  Ethics, Privacy & Security
ITF1.11
ITF 3.2
3
9 IT as a Profession
ITF1.5 
ITF1.6 
ITF1.7
ITF1.10
1
TOTAL 33
Table 2 compares the number of hours of instruction in the IT 
1130 course for each of the knowledge units in the IT 
fundamentals area to the minimum recommended number of 
lecture hours listed in the model curriculum. The next section, 
Section 3.3, discusses the discrepancies between the 
recommended number of hours and the actual number of hours 
taught.
TABLE 2: Comparison of IT 1130 to ITF Knowledge Area
ITF
Knowledge
Units
ITF
Recommended
IT 1130
Knowledge
Units Not
Covered
ITF1
17
14
1.2, 1.3, 1.4
ITF2 6 7.5

ITF3 3  2
3.3
ITF4 3  3
ITF5 2 6.5

ITF6 2 Not
Covered
6.1 ­ 6.7
TOTAL 33  33

3.3 Some Observations
Table 2 illustrates several noteworthy differences between the IT 
1130 course at Georgia Southern University and the knowledge 
units in the ITF knowledge area.
1.  A discrepancy exists between the minimum number of hours
recommended for ITF1 (pervasive themes in IT) and the 
number of hours taught in IT 1130. The 3 hour discrepancy 
can be attributed to the lack of coverage in IT 1130 of 
outcomes ITF1.2 ­ 4. Thus, IT 1130 provides no explicit 
coverage of the reasons for the emergence of complexity in 
IT, the need for IT professionals to handle complexity, and 
the tools and techniques available to an IT professional in 
IT1130. Instead, the IT program at Georgia Southern covers 
complexity-related issues in a number of courses throughout 
the curriculum. For example, some complexity-related issues 
are discussed in a two-course sequence of Java programming 
courses. Standards are discussed in a number of courses 
throughout the curriculum, including a data communication 
course and a web design course in which students learns how 
to implement n-tier architectures. Finally, complexity related 
issues are also covered in a capstone course on IT issues and 
management. Since the need to manage complexity is 
identified in the IT model curriculum as a pervasive theme, 
this is a reasonable alternative to cover this issue.
2.  The IT 1130 course devotes more lectures hours than the
minimum recommendation to ITF2 (organizational issues) 
and ITF5 (application domains). As the recommendation is a 
minimum, this is not problematic; however, it is worth noting 
that the explanation for these discrepancies relates directly to 
the structure of the IT major at Georgia Southern University.
IT majors are expected to take a number of core courses, 
including courses in programming; web design; software 
acquisition, implementation and integration; networking;
3
systems analysis and design; data management; and project 
management. In addition, IT majors specialize in either 
knowledge management and it integration, systems development
and support, telecommunications and network 
administration, or web and multimedia foundations. It is 
useful to students starting out on their academic program in 
IT to receive information on the structure of the core of the 
program, the courses that it consists of and how they relate to 
each other, and on the different specializations available to 
them. Since, for most IT majors, IT 1130 is the first course in 
the program, it is the logical place to meet this aim. Clearly, a 
full discussion of the structure of the program covers more 
than just data management (ITF1.10), a broad overview of IT 
applications (ITF2.1) and their development (ITF2.2), 
systems analysis (ITF2.3), project management (ITF2.4), and 
IT integration (ITF2.5). This explains why IT 1130 devotes 
1.5 more hours than the recommended minimum 6.
Another important element of the IT program at Georgia 
Southern is the inclusion of second disciplines. One of the 
explicit program outcomes of the BS in IT program at 
Georgia Southern is that, on graduation, graduates will be 
able "to demonstrate sufficient understanding of an 
application domain to be able to develop IT applications 
suitable for that application domain." This outcome was 
included at the recommendation of industry representatives 
who were consulted when the IT program was designed ([5]). 
For students to develop this ability, they must be exposed to 
an IT application domain, and the BS IT program at Georgia 
Southern therefore contains so-called second disciplines. 
Second disciplines are coherent sets of 7 3-credit courses in 
potential IT application domains, such as electronic 
broadcasting, law enforcement, music technology, or supply 
chain management. Students typically start taking courses in 
their second discipline early in their program of study (the 
standard program of study suggests that students take their 
first second discipline course in the first semester of their 
sophomore year). It is therefore important that students be 
exposed to the different second disciplines available to them 
early, and IT 1130 is the logical place to do so. One fortunate 
side effect of the need to introduce a second discipline is that 
it gives the program an excellent opportunity to make 
students aware of the broad range of areas in which IT can be 
applied and, hence, cover ITF5 (application domains); 
however, since the number of second disciplines is large 
(currently, 26), adequate coverage requires 4.5 hours more 
than the minimum recommend coverage for ITF 5 
(application domains)
3.  One lecture hour is missing in ITF3 (history of IT) due to
lack of coverage in the IT 1130 course of significant changes 
in HCI (ITF3.3). Some material relevant to this topic is 
introduced in other courses that students tend to take early in 
their program of study, such as the Introductory Java course 
and the introductory web design course. For example, the 
introductory web design course includes among its course 
objectives that students develop the ability to design Web 
pages in accordance with good design principles using 
appropriate styles and formats and the ability to design Web 
pages that are ADA compliant. Material relevant to both 
objectives allows us to expand on HCI design principles and
place these in a historical context. Moreover, students are 
advised to take the introductory web design course in the 
semester following the one in which they take IT 1130, and 
they are therefore likely to be exposed to material relevant to 
ITF3.3 early in their program of study.
4.  The final discrepancy lies in the coverage of the learning
outcomes corresponding to the ITF6 (application of math and 
statistics to IT) in the IT 1130 course; however, the material 
related to this knowledge unit is covered in two courses that 
students are again advised to take early in their program of 
study. One course is a course in discrete mathematics, 
designed specifically for IT majors. It includes among its 
course objectives the ability to explain the importance of 
discrete mathematics in computer science and information 
technology and provides in-depth coverage of functions, sets, 
basic propositional logic, and algorithm design. Finally, all 
students enrolled in the IT major take a statistics course, 
which covers probability.
3.4 Support Material
Since the ITF knowledge area is relatively new, no single 
textbook covers all relevant material. We therefore use a variety of 
sources to support the course.
First, we use Excel  2003 ([8]) and Access 2003 ([7]) to support 
the teaching of spreadsheets and SQL (IT 1130 course outcomes 
2i-2iii identified in section 3.1).
Second, to support the teaching of Topics 3 (components of IT 
systems), 4 (core technologies) and 7 (history of IT), we use 
Discovering Computers 2005 ([9]). While the textbook provides a 
reasonable coverage of some of the subtopics discussed, it does 
not sufficiently stress the importance of the users and the 
importance of HCI in systems development, and we, therefore, 
emphasize this issue throughout the course. We discussed the way 
in which we cover these topics in Points 2 and 3 in section 3.3.
Third, for topics 6 (Application Domains), 8 (Viruses, Crime, 
Law, Ethics, Privacy and Security) and 9 (IT as a profession), we 
use Computers in Our World ([3]); however, we do not rely solely 
on the textbook for our coverage of topic 6. Again, we discussed 
this in Point 2 in section 3.3.
Finally, to support Topics 1 (define IT), 2 (data and information), 
and 5 (IT and its related disciplines), students are given material 
written specifically for the course. Also, we invite representatives 
from computer science and information systems to lecture on their 
specific disciplines and follow this up with a lecture on computer 
engineering and a discussion on the relationship between all four 
disciplines.
Table 3 lists the core learning outcomes for each of the ITF 
knowledge units and maps them to the material in the IT 1130 
course used to achieve that outcome. The material comes either 
from Discovering Computers 2005 ([9]) (DC), Computers in Our 
World ([3]) (CIOW), or material written specifically for the 
course (supplemental material) and/or lectures/discussions led by 
faculty members from other related departments.

4
TABLE 3: Course Materials Used in IT 1130 to Achieve ITF 
Learning Outcomes
ITF
Knowledge
Units
Learning
Outcomes
Material
1
DC Chapters 3-9
2-4 Not
covered
5-7
DC Chapters 12 & 15, CIOW 
Chapters 8 & 9, 
Supplemental Materials
8.9
DC Chapter 10, 
Supplemental Materials
10
DC Chapters 2, 9, 10,12, 13, 
Supplemental Materials
ITF 1
11
CIOW Chapters 7-9
ITF2
1-5
DC Chapters 2, 9, 10, 12, 13. 
Supplemental Materials
1
DC Timeline between 
Chapters 1 and 2, Chapter 2
2
CIOW Chapters 1 - 9
3 Not
covered
ITF3
4
DC Timeline between 
Chapters 1 and 2, Chapter 2
ITF 4
1-4
Supplemental Materials, 
Lecture and Class Discussion 
led by CS, IS and IT 
representatives
ITF5
1-4
CIOW Chapters 1 ­ 9
ITF6 1-7
Not
covered
*Discovering Computers = DC, Computers in Our World = 
CIOW
CONCLUSIONS
The IT Fundamentals knowledge area in the IT model curriculum 
is of central importance to the design of an introductory IT course; 
however, since institutions will have to include additional 
materials in their introductory IT courses, depending on the nature 
of their program, the minimum requirement of 33 lecture hours to 
cover this material is likely to lead to problems. This paper 
presents the experience with an introductory IT course at Georgia
Southern University, IT1130. In general, we believe that, despite 
the need to include additional material in IT1130, we are able to 
cover most of the knowledge units in the IT fundamentals 
knowledge area. We are confident that those knowledge units not 
covered in IT1130 are covered in other courses that students are 
advised to take early in their programs of study. Finally, despite 
the fact that the IT fundamentals knowledge area is new and that 
no textbooks cover all the knowledge units within the area, we 
have been able to identify a set of textbooks that, jointly, cover 
most of the material; however, we provide a relatively small 
amount of additional material, and the textbooks we identified do 
not always cover the material at the appropriate level. Therefore, 
support materials specifically for the IT fundamentals knowledge 
area need to be developed. Whether this is best provided in the 
form of a textbook, or, more dynamically, as a set of online 
learning objects ([1], [2]) is a question open to debate.

REFERENCES
[1]  Abernethy, K., Treu, K, Piegari, G, Reichgelt. H. "An
implementation model for a learning object repository", 
October 2005, E-learn 2005 World Conference on E-learning
in corporate, government, healthcare and higher 
education. Vancouver, Canada.
[2]  Abernethy, K., Treu, K, Piegari, G, Reichgelt. H. "A learning
object repository in support of introduction to information 
technology", August 2005, 6
th
Annual Conference for the
Higher Education Academy Subject Network for Information 
and Computer Science, York, England.
[3] Jedlicka, L. Computers in Our World. Thompson Course
Technologies, 2003.
[4]  Lawson, E, Reichgelt, H, Lunt, B. Ekstrom, J, Kamali, R.
Miller, J and Gorka, S, The Information Technology Model 
Curriculum. Paper submitted to ISECON 2005.
[5]  Reichgelt, H., Price, B. and Zhang, A., "Designing an
Information Technology curriculum: The Georgia Southern 
experience",  Journal of Information Technology Education 
2002, Vol. 1, No. 4, 213-221
[6]  Reichgelt, H., Price, B. and Zhang, A., The Inclusion of
Application Areas in IT Curricula, SIGITE--3, Rochester, 
NY, ACM-SIGITE (formerly SITE), September 2002
[7]  Shelley, G., Cashman, T., Pratt, P. and Last, M. Microsoft
Office Access 2003. Thompson Course Technologies, 2004.
[8]  Shelley, G., Cashman, T., Quasney, J. Microsoft Office Excel
2003. Thompson Course Technologies, 2004.
[9]  Shelley, G., Vermaat, M. and Cashman, T. Discovering
Computers 2005: A Gateway to Information. Thompson 
Course Technologies, 2005.


5
