An Adaptive Information Retrieval System based on Associative Networks
Abstract
In this paper we present a multilingual information
retrieval system that provides access to Tourism information
by exploiting the intuitiveness of natural
language. In particular, we describe the knowledge
representation model underlying the information retrieval
system.
This knowledge representation approach
is based on associative networks and allows the
definition of semantic relationships between domain-intrinsic
information items. The network structure
is used to define weighted associations between information
items and augments the system with a
fuzzy search strategy. This particular search strategy
is performed by a constrained spreading activation
algorithm that implements information retrieval
on associative networks. Strictly speaking, we take
the relatedness of terms into account and show, how
this fuzzy search strategy yields beneficial results and,
moreover, determines highly associated matches to
users' queries. Thus, the combination of the associative
network and the constrained spreading activation
approach constitutes a search algorithm that evaluates
the relatedness of terms and, therefore, provides
a means for implicit query expansion.
Introduction
Providing easy and intuitive access to information
still remains a challenge in the area of information system
research and development. Moreover, as Van Rijsbergen
(1979) points out, the amount of available
information is increasing rapidly and offering accurate
and speedy access to this information is becoming
ever more difficult. This quote, although about
20 years old, is still valid nowadays if you consider the
amount of information offered on the Internet. But
how to address these problems? How to overcome
the limitations associated with conventional search interfaces
? Furthermore, users of information retrieval
systems are often computer illiterate and not familiar
with the required logic for formulating appropriate
queries, e.g. the burdens associated with Boolean
Copyright c 2004, Australian Computer Society, Inc. This paper
appeared at First Asia-Pacific Conference on Conceptual
Modelling (APCCM 2004), Dunedin, New Zealand. Conferences
in Research and Practice in Information Technology, Vol.
31. Sven Hartmann and John Roddick, Ed. Reproduction for
academic, not-for profit purposes permitted provided this text
is included.
logic. This goes hand in hand with the urge to understand
what users really want to know from information
retrieval systems.
Standard information retrieval interfaces consist of
check boxes, predefined option sets or selection lists
forcing users to express her or his needs in a very restricted
manner. Therefore, an approach leaving the
means of expression in users' hands, narrows the gap
between users' needs and interfaces used to express
these needs. An approach addressing this particular
problem is to allow query formulation in natural
language. Natural language interfaces offer easy and
intuitive access to information sources and users can
express their information needs in their own words.
Hence, we present a multilingual information retrieval
system allowing for query formulation in natural
language. To reduce word sense ambiguities the
system operates on a restricted domain. In particular,
the system provides access to tourism information,
like accommodations and their amenities throughout
Austria.
However, the core element of the information retrieval
system remains the underlying knowledge representation
model.
In order to provide a knowledge
representation model allowing to define relations
among information items, an approach based on a
network structure, namely an associative network, is
used.
More precisely, this associative network incorporates
a means for knowledge representation allowing
for the definition of semantic relationships of
domain-intrinsic information. Processing the network
and, therefore, result determination is accomplished
by a technique refereed to as spreading activation.
Some nodes of the network act as sources of activation
and, subsequently, activation is propagated to
adjacent nodes via weighted links. These newly activated
nodes, in turn, transmit activation to associated
nodes, and so on.
We introduce a knowledge representation approach
based on an associative network consisting
of three layers. Moreover, a constrained spreading
activation algorithm implements a processing technique
that operates on the network. Due to the network
structure of the knowledge representation model
and the processing technique, implicit query expansion
enriches the result set with additional matches.
Hence, a fuzzy search strategy is implemented.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows
. In Section <A href="28.html#2">2 we review the architecture of the
information retrieval system that acts as a basis for
the redeveloped approach presented herein.
Moreover
, Section <A href="28.html#4">3 gives an overview about associative
networks and we present an algorithm for processing
such networks, i.e. spreading activation. In Section <A href="28.html#5">4
we describe our approach based on associative net-27
works and finally, some conclusions are given in Section
<A href="28.html#9">5.
AD.M.IN A Natural Language Information Retrieval System
Crestani (1997) points out that information retrieval
is a science that aims to store and allow fast access
to a large amount of data. In contrast to conventional
database systems, an information retrieval system
does not provide an exact answer to a query but
tries to produce a ranking that reflects the intention
of the user. More precisely, documents are ranked according
to statistical similarities based on the occurrence
frequency of terms in queries and documents.
The occurrence frequency of a term provides an indicator
of the significance of this term. Moreover, in order
to get a measure for determining the significance
of a sentence, the position of terms within a sentence
is taken into account and evaluated. For comprehensive
reports about information retrieval see Salton
& McGill (1983), Salton (1989) and Baeza-Yates &
Ribeiro-Neto (1999).
In order to adapt information retrieval systems to
the multilingual demands of users, great efforts have
been made in the field of multilingual information retrieval
. Hull & Grafenstette (1996) subsume several
attempts to define multilingual information retrieval,
where Harman (1995) formulates the most concise
one: "multilingual information retrieval is information
retrieval in any language other than English".
Multilingual information retrieval systems have to
be augmented by mechanisms for query or document
translation to support query formulation in multiple
languages. Information retrieval is such an inexact
discipline that it is not clear whether or not query
translation is necessary or even optimal for identifying
relevant documents and, therefore, to determine
appropriate matches to the user query. Strictly speaking
, the process of translating documents or queries
represents one of the main barriers in multilingual information
retrieval.
Due to the shortness of user queries, query translation
introduces ambiguities that are hard to overcome
. Contrarily, resolving ambiguity in document
translation is easier to handle because of the quantity
of text available. Nevertheless, state-of-the-art
machine translation systems provide only an insufficient
means for translating documents. Therefore,
resolving ambiguities associated with translations remains
a crucial task in the field of multilingual information
retrieval. Ballesteros & Croft (1998), for
instance, present a technique based on co-occurrence
statistics from unlinked text corpora which can be
used to reduce the ambiguity associated with translations
. Furthermore, a quite straightforward approach
in reducing ambiguities is to restrict the domain a
multilingual information retrieval system operates on.
Xu, Netter & Stenzhorn (2000) describe an information
retrieval system that aims at providing
uniform multilingual access to heterogeneous data
sources on the web.
The MIETTA (Multilingual
Tourist Information on the World Wide Web) system
has been applied to the tourism domain containing
information about three European regions,
namely Saarland, Turku, and Rome. The languages
supported are English, Finnish, French, German, and
Italian. Since some of the tourism information about
the regions were available in only one language, machine
translation was used to deal with these web
documents. Due to the restricted domain, automatic
translation should suffice to understand the basic
meaning of the translated document without having
knowledge of the source language. Users can query
the system in various ways, such as free text queries,
form-based queries, or browsing through the concept
hierarchy employed in the system. MIETTA makes
it transparent to the users whether they search in a
database or a free-form document collection.
2.1
The Architecture of the Original System
The software architecture of the natural language information
retrieval system is designed as a pipeline
structure. Hence, successively activated pipeline elements
apply transformations on natural language
queries that are posed via arbitrary client devices,
such as, for instance, web browsers, PDAs or mobile
phones. Due to the flexibility of this approach, different
pipeline layouts can be used to implement different
processing strategies. Figure <A href="28.html#3">1 depicts the layout
of the software architecture and illustrates the way of
interaction of the pipeline elements.
In a first step, the natural language query is evaluated
by an automatic language identification module
to determine the language of the query. Next, the system
corrects typographic errors and misspellings to
improve retrieval performance. Before adding grammar
rules and semantic information to the query
terms, a converter transforms numerals to their nu-meric
equivalents. Depending on the rules assigned to
the query terms, a mapping process associates these
terms with SQL fragments that represent the query
in a formal way. Due to the fact that the system
uses a relational database as backend this mapping
process is crucial. In a next step the SQL fragments
are combined according to the modifiers (e.g. "and",
"or", "near", "not") identified in the query and a single
SQL statement that reflects the intention of the
query is obtained. Then the system determines the
appropriate result and generates an XML representation
for further processing. Finally, the XML result
set is adapted to fit the needs of the client device.
The remainder of this section gives a brief outline
of the system.
2.1.1
The Knowledge Base
A major objective of the Ad.M.In.(Adaptive Multilingual
Interfaces) system was to separate the program
logic from domain dependent data. In particular
, language, domain and device dependent portions
are placed in the knowledge base. Thus, the knowledge
base represents the backbone of the system and
consists of a relational database and a set of ontologies
. The database stores information about domain
entities, as, for instance, amenities of accommodations
. The ontologies store synonyms, define semantic
relations and grammar rules.
Basically, the knowledge base consists of separate
XML files, whereas the synonym ontology is used to
associate terms having the same semantic meaning,
i.e. describes linguistic relationships like synonymy.
The synonym ontology is based on a flat structure,
allowing to define synonymy. Taking a look at the
tourism domain, "playground" represents a concept
possessing several semantic equivalents, as, for instance
, "court".
Unfortunately, the synonym ontology provides no
means to associate concepts. Consider, for example,
the three concepts "sauna", "steam bath" and "vegetarian
kitchen". Straightforward, someone might derive
a stronger degree of relatedness between the concepts
"sauna" and "steam bath" as between "sauna"
and "vegetarian kitchen".
The second component of the knowledge base
stores a set of grammar rules.
More precisely, a
lightweight grammar describes how certain concepts
28
Figure 1: Software Architecture
may be modified by prepositions, adverbial or adjectival
structures that are also specified in the synonym
ontology. For a more detailed description we refer
to Berger (2001).
2.1.2
Language Identification
To identify the language of a query, an n-gram-based
text classification approach (cf. Cavnar & Trenkle
(1994)) is used. An n-gram is an n-character slice of
a longer character string. As an example, for n = 3,
the tri­grams of the string "language" are: { la, lan,
ang, ngu, gua, uag, age, ge }.
Dealing with multiple
words in a string, the blank character is usu-ally
replaced by an underscore " " and is also taken
into account for the construction of an n-gram document
representation. This language classification approach
using n-grams requires sample texts for each
language to build statistical models, i.e. n-gram frequency
profiles, of the languages. We used various
tourism-related texts, e.g. hotel descriptions and holiday
package descriptions, as well as news articles both
in English and German language. The n-grams, with
n ranging from 1...5, of these sample texts were an-alyzed
and sorted in descending order according to
their frequency, separately for each language. These
sorted histograms are the n-gram frequency profiles
for a given language. For a comprehensive description
see Berger, Dittenbach & Merkl (2003).
2.1.3
Error Correction
To improve retrieval performance, potential orthographic
errors have to be considered in the web-based
interface.
After identifying the language, a spell-checking
module is used to determine the correctness
of query terms. The efficiency of the spell checking
process improves during the runtime of the system
by learning from previous queries. The spell checker
uses the metaphone algorithm (cf. Philips (1990)) to
transform the words into their soundalikes. Because
this algorithm has originally been developed for the
English language, the rule set defining the mapping of
words to the phonetic code has to be adapted for other
languages. In addition to the base dictionary of the
spell checker, domain-dependent words and proper
names like names of cities, regions or states, have
to be added to the dictionary. For every misspelled
term of the query, a list of potentially correct words
is returned. First, the misspelled word is mapped to
its metaphone equivalent, then the words in the dictionary
, whose metaphone translations have at most
an edit distance (cf. Levenshtein (1966)) of two, are
added to the list of suggested words. The suggestions
are ranked according to the mean of first, the edit
distance between the misspelled word and the suggested
word, and second, the edit distance between
the misspelled word's metaphone and the suggested
word's. The smaller this value is for a suggestion, the
more likely it is to be the correct substitution from
the orthographic or phonetic point of view. However,
this ranking does not take domain-specific information
into account. Because of this deficiency, correctly
spelled words in queries are stored and their respective
number of occurrences is counted. The words
in the suggestion list for a misspelled query term are
looked up in this repository and the suggested word
having the highest number of occurrences is chosen
as the replacement of the erroneous original query
term. In case of two or more words having the same
number of occurrences the word that is ranked first
is selected. If the query term is not present in the
repository up to this moment, it is replaced by the
first suggestion, i.e. the word being phonetically or
orthographically closest. Therefore, suggested words
that are very similar to the misspelled word, yet make
no sense in the context of the application domain,
might be rejected as replacements. Consequently, the
word correction process described above is improved
by dynamic adaptation to past knowledge.
Another important issue in interpreting the natural
language query is to detect terms consisting of
multiple words. Proper names like "Bad Kleinkirch-heim"
or nouns like "parking garage" have to be
treated as one element of the query. Therefore, all
multi-word denominations known to the system are
stored in an efficient data structure allowing to identify
such cases. More precisely, regular expressions
are used to describe rules applied during the identification
process.
2.1.4
SQL Mapping
With the underlying relational database management
system PostgreSQL, the natural language query has
to be transformed into a SQL statement to retrieve
29
the requested information. As mentioned above the
knowledge base describes parameterized SQL fragments
that are used to build a single SQL statement
representing the natural language query. The query
terms are tagged with class information, i.e. the relevant
concepts of the domain (e.g. "hotel" as a type
of accommodation or "sauna" as a facility provided
by a hotel), numerals or modifying terms like "not",
"at least", "close to" or "in". If none of the classes
specified in the ontology can be applied, the database
tables containing proper names have to be searched.
If a noun is found in one of these tables, it is tagged
with the respective table's name, such that "Tyrol"
will be marked as a federal state. In the next step,
this class information is used by the grammar to select
the appropriate SQL fragments. Finally, the SQL
fragments have to be combined to a single SQL statement
reflecting the natural language query of the
user. The operators combining the SQL fragments
are again chosen according to the definitions in the
grammar.
Associative Networks
Quillian (1968) introduced the basic principle of a
semantic network and it played, since then, a central
role in knowledge representation. The building
blocks of semantic networks are, first, nodes that express
knowledge in terms of concepts, second, concept
properties, and third,the hierarchical sub-super class
relationship between these concepts.
Each concept in a semantic network represents a
semantic entity. Associations between concepts describe
the hierarchical relationship between these semantic
entities via is-a or instance-of links.
The
higher a concept moves up in the hierarchy along is-a
relations, the more abstract is its semantic meaning
. Properties are attached to concepts and, therefore
, properties are also represented by concepts and
linked to nodes via labeled associations. Furthermore,
a property that is linked to a high-level concept is inherited
by all descendants of the concept. Hence, it is
assumed that the property applies to all subsequent
nodes. An example of a semantic network is depicted
in Figure <A href="28.html#5">2.
Semantic networks initially emerged in cognitive
psychology and the term itself has been used in the
field of knowledge representation in a far more general
sense than described above. In particular, the
term semantic network has been commonly used to
refer to a conceptual approach known as associative
network.
An associative network defines a generic
network which consists of nodes representing information
items (semantic entities) and associations between
nodes, that express, not necessarily defined or
labeled, relations among nodes. Links between particular
nodes might be weighted to determine the
strength of connectivity.
3.1
Spreading Activation
A commonly used technique, which implements information
retrieval on semantic or associative networks,
is often referred to as spreading activation.
The
spreading activation processing paradigm is tight-knit
with the supposed mode of operation of human memory
. It was introduced to the field of artificial intelligence
to obtain a means of processing semantic or
associative networks. The algorithm, which underlies
the spreading activation (SA) paradigm, is based
on a quite simple approach and operates on a data
structure that reflects the relationships between information
items. Thus, nodes model real world entities
and links between these nodes define the relatedness
of entities. Furthermore, links might possess
, first, a specific direction, second, a label and,
third, a weight that reflects the degree of association.
This conceptual approach allows for the definition of
a more general, a more generic network than the basic
structure of a semantic network demands. Nevertheless
, it could be used to model a semantic network as
well as a more generic one, for instance an associative
network.
The idea, underlying spreading activation, is to
propagate activation starting from source nodes via
weighted links over the network. More precisely, the
process of propagating activation from one node to
adjacent nodes is called a pulse. The SA algorithm
is based on an iterative approach that is divided into
two steps: first, one or more pulses are triggered and,
second, a termination check determines if the process
has to continue or to halt.
Furthermore, a single pulse consists of a pre-adjustment
phase, the spreading process and a post-adjustment
phase.
The optional pre- and post-adjustment
phases might incorporate a means of activation
decay, or to avoid reactivation from previous
pulses. Strictly speaking, these two phases are used
to gain more control over the network. The spreading
phase implements propagation of activation over the
network. Spreading activation works according to the
formula:
I
j
(p) =
k
i
(O
i
(p - 1) · w
ij
)
(1)
Each node j determines the total input I
j
at pulse
p of all linked nodes. Therefore, the output O
i
(p - 1)
at the previous pulse p - 1 of node i is multiplied with
the associated weight w
ij
of the link connecting node i
to node j and the grand total for all k connected nodes
is calculated. Inputs or weights can be expressed by
binary values (0/1), inhibitory or reinforcing values
(-1/+1), or real values defining the strength of the
connection between nodes. More precisely, the first
two options are used in the application of semantic
networks, the latter one is commonly used for associative
networks. This is due to the fact that the type
of association does not necessarily have some exact
semantic meaning. The weight rather describes the
relationship between nodes. Furthermore, the output
value of a node has to be determined. In most cases,
no distinction is made between the input value and
the activation level of a node, i.e. the input value of a
node and its activation level are equal. Before firing
the activation to adjacent nodes a function calculates
the output depending on the activation level of the
node:
O
i
= f (I
i
)
(2)
Various functions can be used to determine the
output value of a node, for instance the sigmoid function
, or a linear activation function, but most commonly
used is the threshold function. The threshold
function determines, if a node is considered to be active
or not, i.e. the activation level of each node is
compared to the threshold value. If the activation
level exceeds the threshold, the state of the node is
set to active. Subsequent to the calculation of the
activation state, the output value is propagated to
adjacent nodes. Normally, the same output value is
sent to all adjacent nodes.
The process described
above is repeated, pulse after pulse, and activation
spreads through the network and activates more and
more nodes until a termination condition is met. Finally
, the SA process halts and a final activation state
is obtained. Depending on the application's task the
30
accomodation
hotel
animal
farm
pension
pig
sheep
facility
steam bath
sauna
hot
is_a
is_a
is_a
is_a
is_a
is_a
is_a
has
offers
is
is
Figure 2: A semantic network example of tourism-related terms
activation levels are evaluated and interpreted accordingly
.
3.2
Taming Spreading Activation
Unfortunately, the basic approach of spreading activation
entails some major drawbacks. Strictly speaking
, without appropriate control, activation might be
propagated all over the network. Furthermore, the semantics
of labeled associations are not incorporated
in SA and it is quite difficult to integrate an inference
mechanism based on the semantics of associations
. To overcome these undesired side-effects the
integration of constraints helps to tame the spreading
process (cf. Crestani (1997)). Some constraints
commonly used are described as follows.
· Fan-out constraint: Nodes with a broad semantic
meaning possess a vast number of links to
adjacent nodes. This circumstance implies that
such nodes activate large areas of the network.
Therefore, activation should diminish at nodes
with a high degree of connectivity to avoid this
unwanted effect.
· Distance constraint: The basic idea underlying
this constraint is, that activation ceases
when it reaches nodes far away from the activation
source. Thus, the term far corresponds
to the number of links over which activation was
spread, i.e. the greater the distance between two
nodes, the weaker is their semantic relationship.
According to the distance of two nodes their relation
can be classified. Directly connected nodes
share a first order relation. Two nodes connected
via an intermediate node are associated by a second
order relation, and so on.
· Activation constraint: Threshold values are
assigned to nodes (it is not necessary to apply
the same value to all nodes) and are interpreted
by the threshold function. Moreover, threshold
values can be adapted during the spreading process
in relation to the total amount of activity in
the network.
· Path constraint: Usually, activation spreads
over the network using all available links. The integration
of preferred paths allows to direct activation
according to application-dependent rules.
Another enhancement of the spreading activation
model is the integration of a feedback process. The
activation level of some nodes or the entire network
is evaluated by, for instance, another process or by
a user. More precisely, a user checks the activation
level of some nodes and adapts them according to
her or his needs.
Subsequently, activation spreads
depending on the user refinement. Additionally, users
may indicate preferred paths for spreading activation
and, therefore, are able to adapt the spreading process
to their own needs.
Recommendation via Spreading Activation
One of the first information retrieval systems using
constrained spreading activation was GRANT. Kjeldsen
& Cohen (1987) developed a system that handles
information about research proposals and potential
funding agencies. GRANT's domain knowledge is
stored in a highly associated semantic network. The
search process is carried out by constrained spreading
activation over the network. In particular, the system
extensively uses path constraints in the form of path
endorsement. GRANT can be considered as an inference
system applying repeatedly the same inference
schema:
IF x AND R(x, y)  y
(3)
R(x, y) represents a path between two nodes x and y.
This inference rule can be interpreted as follows: "if
a founding agency is interested in topic x and there
is a relation between topic x and topic y then the
founding agency might be interested in the related
topic y."
Croft, Lucia, Crigean & Willet (1989) developed
an information retrieval system initially intended to
study the possibility of retrieving documents by plausible
inference. In order to implement plausible inference
constrained spreading activation was chosen
accidently. The I
3
R system acts as a search intermediary
(cf. Croft & Thompson (1987)). To accomplish
this task the system uses domain knowledge to
refine user queries, determines the appropriate search
strategy, assists the user in evaluating the output and
reformulating the query. In its initial version, the domain
knowledge was represented using a tree structure
of concepts. The design was later refined to meet
the requirements of a semantic network.
Belew (1989) investigated the use of connectionist
techniques in an information retrieval system
called Adaptive Information Retrieval (AIR). The
system handles information about scientific publications
, like the publication title and the author. AIR
uses a weighted graph as knowledge representation
paradigm. For each document, author and keyword
(keywords are words found in publication titles) a
node is created and associations between nodes are
constructed from an initial representation of documents
and attributes. A user's query causes initial
activity to be placed on some nodes of the network.
31
This activity is propagated to other nodes until certain
conditions are met. Nodes with the highest level
of activation represent the answer to the query by the
AIR system. Furthermore, users are allowed to assign
a degree of relevance to the results (++, +, -, --).
This causes new links to be created and the adaptation
of weights between existing links. Moreover,
feedback is averaged across the judgments of many
users.
A mentionable aspect of the AIR system is that no
provision is made for the traditional Boolean operators
like AND and OR. Rather, AIR emulates these
logical operations because "the point is that the difference
between AND and OR is a matter of degree".
This insight goes back to Von Neumann (as pointed
out by Belew (1989)).
A system based on a combination of an ostensive
approach with the associative retrieval approach is described
in Crestani & Lee (2000). In the WebSCSA
(Web Searching by Constrained Spreading Activation
) approach a query does not consist of keywords.
Instead, the system is based on an ostensive approach
and assumes that the user has already identified relevant
Web pages that act as a basis for the following
retrieval process.
Subsequently, relevant pages are
parsed for links and they are followed to search for
other relevant associated pages. The user does not ex-plicitly
refine the query. More precisely, users point to
a number of relevant pages to initiate a query and the
WebSCSA system combines the content of these pages
to build a search profile. In contrast to conventional
search engines WebSCSA does not make use of extensive
indices during the search process. Strictly speaking
, it retrieves relevant information only by navigating
the Web at the time the user searches for information
. The navigation is processed and controlled by
means of a constrained spreading activation model.
In order to unleash the power of WebSCSA the system
should be used when users already have a point
to start for her or his search. Pragmatically speaking,
the intention of WebSCSA is to enhance conventional
search engines, use these as starting points and not
to compete with them.
Hartmann & Strothotte (2002) focus on a spreading
activation approach to automatically find associations
between text passages and multimedia material
like illustrations, animations, sounds, and videos.
Moreover, a media-independent formal representation
of the underlying knowledge is used to automatically
adapt illustrations to the contents of small text segments
. The system contains a hierarchical representation
of basic anatomic concepts such as bones, muscles
, articulations, tendons, as well as their parts and
regions.
Network structures provide a flexible model for
adaptation and integration of additional information
items. Nevertheless, Crestani (1997) points out that
"... the problem of building a network which effec-tively
represents the useful relations (in terms of the
IRs aims) has always been the critical point of many
of the attempts to use SA in IR. These networks are
very difficult to build, to maintain and keep up to date.
Their construction requires in depth application domain
knowledge that only experts in the application
domain can provide."
Dittenbach, Merkl & Berger (2003) present an approach
based on neural networks for organizing words
of a specific domain according to their semantic relations
. A two-dimensional map is used to display
semantically similar words in spatially regions. This
representation can support the construction and enrichment
of information stored in the associative network
.
4.1
The Redeveloped System Architecture
To overcome the limitations of the knowledge base of
the original system, the development of an alternative
approach to model domain knowledge was necessary
.
Basically, the unassociated, non-hierarchic
knowledge representation model inhibits the power
of the system. Strictly speaking, the original system
failed to retrieve results on a fuzzy basis, i.e. the results
determined by the system provide exact matches
only, without respect to first, interactions users made
during past sessions, second, personal preferences of
users, third, semantic relations of domain intrinsic information
, and fourth, locational interdependencies.
In order to adapt the system architecture accordingly
, an approach based on associative networks was
developed. This associative network replaces the flat
synonym ontology used in the original system. Moreover
, both the grammar rules and the SQL fragments
have been removed from the knowledge base.
More precisely, the functionality and logic is now covered
by newly developed pipeline elements or implic-itly
resolved by the associative network.
In analogy
to the original pipeline, the first three processing
steps are accomplished.
Next, a newly implemented
initialization­element associates concepts extracted
from the query with nodes of the associative
network. These nodes act as activation sources. Subsequently
, the newly designed spreading ­element implements
the process of activation propagation. Finally
, the new evaluation­element analyzes the activation
level of the associative network determined
during the spreading phase and produces a ranking
according to this activation level.
4.1.1
The Knowledge Representation Model
Basically, the knowledge base of the information retrieval
system is composed of two major parts: first,
a relational database that stores information about
domain entities and, second, a data structure based
on an associative network that models the relationships
among terms relevant to the domain. Each domain
entity is described by a freely definable set of attributes
. To provide a flexible and extensible means
for specifying entity attributes, these attributes are
organized as &lt;name, value&gt; pairs. An example from
the tourism domain is depicted in Table <A href="28.html#6">1.
Hotel Wellnesshof
category
4
facility
sauna
facility
solarium
facility
...
Table 1: &lt;name,value&gt;-pair example for entity "Hotel
Wellnesshof "
The associative network consists of a set of nodes
and each node represents an information item. Moreover
, each node is member of one of three logical layers
defined as follows:
· Abstraction layer: One objective of the rede-velopment
of the knowledge base was to integrate
information items with abstract semantic meaning
. More precisely, in contrast to the knowledge
base used in the original system which only
supported modeling of entity attributes, the new
approach allows the integration of a broader set
of terms, e.g. terms like "wellness" or "summer
activities" that virtually combine several information
items.
32
· Conceptual layer: The second layer is used to
associate entity attributes according to their semantic
relationship. Thus, each entity attribute
has a representation at the conceptual layer. Furthermore
, the strengths of the relationships between
information items are expressed by a real
value associated with the link.
· Entity layer: Finally, the entity layer associates
entities with information items (entity attributes
) of the conceptual layer, e.g. an entity
possessing the attribute "sauna" is associated
with the sauna­node of the conceptual layer.
The building blocks of the network are concepts.
A concept represents an information item possessing
several semantically equivalent terms, i.e. synonyms,
in different languages. Each concept possesses one of
three different roles:
· Concrete concepts are used to represent information
items at the conceptual layer. More
precisely, concrete concepts refer to entity attributes
.
· Concepts with an abstract role refer to terms at
the abstraction layer.
· Finally, the modifier role is used to categorize
concepts that alter the processing rules for abstract
or concrete concepts. A modifier like, for
instance, "not" allows the exclusion of concepts
by negation of the assigned initialization value.
Moreover, concepts provide, depending on their
role, a method for expressing relationships among
them.
The connectedTo relation defines a bidirec-tional
weighted link between two concrete concepts,
e.g. the concrete concept "sauna" is linked to "steam
bath". The second relation used to link information
items is the parentOf association. It is used to express
the sub-super class relationship between abstract concepts
or concrete and abstract concepts.
A set of concepts representing a particular domain
is described in a single XML file and acts as input
source for the information retrieval system. During
initialization, the application parses the XML file, in-stantiates
all concepts, generates a list of synonyms
pointing at corresponding concepts, associates concepts
according to their relations and, finally, links the
entities to concrete concepts. Currently, the associative
network consists of about 2,200 concepts, 10,000
links and more than 13,000 entities. The concept network
includes terms that describe the tourism domain
as well as towns, cities and federal states throughout
Austria.
To get a better picture of the interdependencies
associated with the layers introduced above see Figure
<A href="28.html#8">3. Each layer holds a specific set of concepts.
Abstract concepts associate concepts at the same or
at the conceptual layer. Concepts at the conceptual
layer define links between entity attributes and associate
these attributes with entities at the entity layer.
Finally, entities are placed at the lowest layer, the
entity layer. Concepts at the entity layer are not associated
with items at the same layer. Consider, for
example, the abstract concept "indoor sports" and
the concept "sauna" as concepts from which activation
originates from. First, activation is propagated
between the abstraction layer to the conceptual layer
via the dashed line from "indoor sports" to "table tennis"
. We shall note, that dashed lines indicate links
between concepts of different layers. Thus, "sauna"
and "table tennis" act as source concepts and, moreover
, activation is spread through the network along
links at the conceptual layer. Activation received by
concepts at the conceptual layer is propagated to the
entities at the entity layer stimulating, in this particular
case, the entities "Hotel Stams", "Hotel Thaya"
as well as "Wachauerhof ". Moreover, a fraction of
activation is propagated to adjacent concept nodes at
the conceptual layer, i.e. "solarium", "whirlpool" as
well as "tennis", and to entities, i.e. "Hotel Wiental"
and "Forellenhof ", respectively.
4.1.2
Processing the Associative Network
Due to the flexibility and adaptivity of the original
system, the integration of the redesigned parts has
been accomplished with relatively little effort. In particular
, the existing knowledge base has been replaced
by the associative network and additional pipeline elements
to implement spreading activation have been
incorporated.
Figure <A href="28.html#9">4 depicts the redeveloped knowledge base
on which the processing algorithm operates.
The
conceptual layer stores concrete concepts and the
weighted links among them.
Associating abstract
concepts with concrete concepts is done at the abstraction
layer. Each entity has a unique identifier
that is equivalent to the entity identifier stored in the
relational database. Furthermore, entities are connected
to concepts at the conceptual layer.
More
precisely, an entity is connected to all attributes it
possesses. As an example consider the entity "Hotel
Stams" as depicted in Figure <A href="28.html#9">4. This hotel offers
a "sauna", a "steam bath" and a "solarium" and is,
therefore, linked to the corresponding concepts at the
conceptual layer.
First, a user's query, received by the information
retrieval system, is decomposed into single terms. After
applying an error correction mechanism and a
phrase detection algorithm to the query, terms found
in the synonym lexicon are linked to their corresponding
concept at the abstraction or conceptual layer.
These concepts act as activation sources and, subsequently
, the activation process is initiated and activation
spreads according to the algorithm outlined
below.
At the beginning, the role of each concept is evaluated
. Depending on its role, different initialization
strategies are applied:
· Modifier role: In case of the "not" modifier,
the initialization value of the subsequent concept
is multiplied with a negative number. Due to the
fact that the "and" and "or" modifiers are im-plicitly
resolved by the associative network, they
receive no special treatment. More precisely, if,
for instance, somebody is searching for an accommodation
with a sauna or solarium, those accommodations
offering both facilities will be ranked
higher than others, providing only one of the desired
facilities. Furthermore, the "near" modifier
reflecting geographic dependencies, is automatically
resolved by associating cities or towns
within a circumference of 15km. Depending on
the distance, the weights are adapted accordingly
, i.e. the closer they are together, the higher
is the weight of the link in the associative network
.
· Abstract role: If a source concept is abstract,
the set of source concepts is expanded by resolving
the parentOf relation between parent and
child concepts.
This process is repeated until
all abstract concepts are resolved, i.e. the set of
source concepts contains members of the conceptual
layer only. The initial activation value is
propagated to all child concepts, with respect to
the weighted links.
33
Figure 3: Network layer interdependencies
· Concrete role: The initial activation level of
concrete concepts is set to initialization value
defined in the XML source file. The spreading
activation process takes place at the conceptual
layer, i.e. the connectedTo relations between adjacent
concepts are used to propagate activation
through the network.
After the initialization phase has completed, the iterative
spreading process is activated. During a single
iteration one pulse is performed, i.e. the number of
iterations equals the number of pulses. Starting from
the set of source concepts determined during initialization
, in the current implementation activation is
spread to adjacent nodes according to the following
formula:
O
i
(p) =
0
if I
i
(p) &lt;  ,
F
i
p+1
· I
i
(p)
else, with F
i
= (1 C
i
C
T
) (4)
The output, O
i
(p), sent from node i at pulse p,
is calculated as the fraction of F
i
, which limits the
propagation according to the degree of connectivity
of node i (i.e. fan-out constraint, cf. Section <A href="28.html#5">3.2), and
p + 1, expressing the diminishing semantic relationship
according to the distance of node i to activation
source nodes (i.e. distance constraint, cf. Section <A href="28.html#5">3.2).
Moreover, F
i
is calculated by dividing the number of
concepts C
i
directly connected to node i by the total
number of nodes C
T
building the associative network.
Note,  represents a threshold value.
Simultaneous to calculating the output value for
all connected nodes, the activation level I
i
(p) of node
i is added to all associated entities. More precisely,
each entity connected to node i receives the same
value and adds it to an internal variable representing
the total activation of the entity. As an example,
if the concept node "sauna" is activated, the activation
potential is propagated to the entities "Hotel
Stams" and "Hotel Thaya" (cf. Figure <A href="28.html#9">4). Next, all
newly activated nodes are used in the subsequent iteration
as activation sources and the spreading process
continues until the maximum number of iterations is
reached.
After the spreading process has terminated, the
system inspects all entities and ranks them according
to their activation. Figure <A href="28.html#10">5 depicts the results
determined for the example query
Ich und meine Kinder m¨
ochten in einem Hotel in
Kitzb¨
uhel Urlaub machen.
Es sollte ein Dampfbad
hab<A href="28.html#8">en.
<A href="28.html#8">1
In this particular case, the entities "Schwarzer
Adler Kitzb¨
uhel" and "Hotel Schloss Lebenberg ­
Kitzb¨
uhel" located in "Kitzb¨
uhel" are suggested to
be the best matching answers to the query. Moreover,
the result set includes matches that are closely related
to the user's query. Thus, depending on the relations
stored in the associative network, entities offering related
concepts are activated accordingly. More precisely
, not only the attributes "hotel", "steam bath"
and "kids" are taken into account, but also all other
related entity attributes (e.g. "sauna", "whirlpool",
"solarium", etc.) have some influence on the ranking
position. Furthermore, accommodations in cities in
the vicinity of "Kitzb¨
uhel" providing the same or even
better offers are also included in the result set. Thus,
the associative network provides a means for exact
information retrieval and incorporates a fuzzy search
strategy that determines closely related matches to
the user's query.
1
Me and my kids would like to spend our holidays in a hotel in
Kitzbhel. It should have a steam bath.
34
Figure 4: Knowledge base architecture
Conclusion
A natural language system based on an approach
described in Berger (2001) and Berger, Dittenbach,
Merkl & Winiwarter (2001) has been reviewed in this
paper and, furthermore, provided the basis for the research
presented herein. The reviewed system offers
multilingual access to information on a restricted domain
. In this particular case the system operates on
the tourism domain. Moreover, users of the search interface
are encouraged to formulate queries in natural
language, i.e. they are able to express their intentions
in their own words.
We developed a knowledge representation model
that facilitates the definition of semantic relations between
information items exemplified by terms of the
tourism domain.
In particular, an associative network
based on a three layered structure was introduced
. First, the abstraction layer allows modelling
of terms with a subjective or broader semantic meaning
, second, the conceptual layer is used to define
relations via weighted links between terms, and, finally
, the entity layer provides a means to associate
elements stored in a relational database with information
items in the associative network. Moreover,
a constrained spreading activation algorithm implements
a processing technique operating on the network
. Generally, the combination of the associative
nature of the knowledge representation model and the
constrained spreading activation approach constitutes
a search algorithm that evaluates the relatedness of
terms and, therefore, provides a means for implicit
query expansion.
The flexible method of defining relationships between
terms unleashes the ability to determine highly
associated results as well as results that are predefined
due to personal preferences. Moreover, especially designed
associative networks can be used to model scenarios
, as, for instance, a winter holiday scenario that
favors accommodations offering winter sports activities
by adapting the weights of links accordingly.
One important task for further enhancement is the
possibility to express the relevance of query terms.
Users should be able to assign a degree of significance
to terms. Consider, for example, a user searching for
an accommodation with several amenities in the capital
city of Austria. Moreover, the user is a vegetarian.
Therefore, a means for expressing the importance of
vegetarian kitchen is needed. In order to accomplish
this requirement, the system might be extended to
understand words that emphasis terms, e.g. in analogy
to modifiers like "and", "or", "near", etc. the
word "important" is handled like a modifier and influences
the activation level of the following query
term. Additionally, an interface providing a graphical
instrument to express relevance by means of a
slide controller might be considered.
Furthermore, an associative network might act as
a kind of short term memory. More precisely, during
a user session a particular network is used to store
the activation level determined during past user interactions
. A user, for instance, is searching for a
hotel in Vienna. Thus, the associative network stores
the activation level for further processing. Next, the
user might restrict the results to accommodations offering
a sauna. This spreading process is carried out
using the associative network determined during the
previous interaction.
References
Baeza-Yates, R. A. & Ribeiro-Neto, B. (1999),
Modern Information Retrieval, Addison-Wesley,
Reading, MA.
Ballesteros, L. & Croft, W. B. (1998), Resolving
ambiguity for cross-language retrieval, in `Re-search
and Development in Information Retrieval'
, pp. 64­71.
Belew, R. K. (1989), Adaptive information retrieval:
Using a connectionist representation to retrieve
and learn about documents, in N. J. Nicholas
J. Belkin & C. J. Van Rijsbergen, eds, `Proceedings
of the 12th International Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval
(SIGIR'89)', ACM, pp. 11­20.
Berger, H. (2001), Adaptive multilingual interfaces,
Master's thesis, Vienna University of Technology
.
Berger, H., Dittenbach, M. & Merkl, D. (2003),
Querying tourism information systems in natural
language, in `Proceedings of the 2nd International
Conference on Information System
Technology and its Applications (ISTA 2003)',
Kharkiv, Ukraine.
Berger, H., Dittenbach, M., Merkl, D. & Winiwarter,
W. (2001), Providing multilingual natural language
access to tourism information, in W. Winiwarter
, S. Bressan & I. K. Ibrahim, eds, `Proceedings
of the 3rd International Conference on
35
Figure 5: Weighted result set determined by constrained spreading activation
Information Integration and Web-based Applications
and Services (IIWAS 2001)', Austrian
Computer Society, Linz, Austria, pp. 269­276.
Cavnar, W. B. & Trenkle, J. M. (1994), N-gram-based
text categorization, in `International Symposium
on Document Analysis and Information
Retrieval', Las Vegas, NV.
Crestani, F. (1997), `Application of spreading activation
techniques in information retrieval', Artificial
Intelligence Review 11(6), 453­582.
Crestani, F. & Lee, P. L. (2000), `Searching the web
by constrained spreading activation', Information
Processing and Management 36(4), 585­
605.
Croft, W., Lucia, T., Crigean, J. & Willet, P. (1989),
`Retrieving documents by plausible inference: an
experimental study', Information Processing &
Management 25(6), 599­614.
Croft, W. & Thompson, R. H. (1987), `I
3
R: A New
Approach to the Design of Document Retrieval
Systems', Journal of the American Society for
Information Science 38(6), 389­404.
Dittenbach, M., Merkl, D. & Berger, H. (2003), Using
a connectionist approach for enhancing domain
ontologies: Self-organizing word category
maps revisited, in `Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on Data Warehousing and
Knowledge Discovery - (DaWaK 2003)'.
Accepted
for publication.
Harman, D. K. (1995), Overview of the 3rd Text
Retrieval Conference (TREC-3), in D. K. Harman
, ed., `Proceedings of the 3rd Text Retrieval
Conference (TREC-3)', NIST Special Publication
500­225, pp. 1­19.
Hartmann, K. & Strothotte, T. (2002), A spreading
activation approach to text illustration, in `Proceedings
of the 2nd International Symposium on
Smart graphics', ACM Press, pp. 39­46.
Hull, D. A. & Grafenstette, G. (1996), Querying
across languages: A dictionary-based approach
to multilingual information retrieval, in `Proceedings
of ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR
1996)', pp. 49­57.
Kjeldsen, R. & Cohen, P. (1987), `The evolution and
performance of the GRANT system', IEEE Expert
pp. 73­79.
Levenshtein, V. I. (1966), `Binary codes capable of
correcting deletions, insertions and reversals',
Soviet Physics Doklady 10(8), 707­710.
Philips, L. (1990), `Hanging on the metaphone', Computer
Language Magazine 7(12).
Quillian, M. R. (1968), Semantic memory, in M. Min-sky
, ed., `Semantic Information Processing', MIT
Press, pp. 227­270.
Salton, G. (1989), Automatic Text Processing: The
Transformation, Analysis, and Retrieval of Information
by Computer, Addison-Wesley, Reading
, MA.
Salton, G. & McGill, M. J. (1983), Introduction
to Modern Information Retrieval, McGraw-Hill,
New York.
Van Rijsbergen, C. J. (1979), Information Retrieval,
Department of Computer Science, University of
Glasgow.
Xu, F., Netter, K. & Stenzhorn, H. (2000), Mietta a
framework for uniform and multilingual access
to structured database and web information, in
`Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop
on Information Retrieval with Asian languages'.
36
