StyleCam: Interactive Stylized 3D Navigation using Integrated Spatial & Temporal Controls
ABSTRACT
This paper describes StyleCam, an approach for authoring 
3D viewing experiences that incorporate stylistic elements 
that are not available in typical 3D viewers. A key aspect of 
StyleCam is that it allows the author to significantly tailor 
what the user sees and when they see it. The resulting 
viewing experience can approach the visual richness and 
pacing of highly authored visual content such as television 
commercials or feature films. At the same time, StyleCam 
allows for a satisfying level of interactivity while avoiding 
the problems inherent in using unconstrained camera 
models. The main components of StyleCam are camera 
surfaces which spatially constrain the viewing camera; 
animation clips that allow for visually appealing transitions 
between different camera surfaces; and a simple, unified, 
interaction technique that permits the user to seamlessly 
and continuously move between spatial-control of the 
camera and temporal-control of the animated transitions. 
Further, the user's focus of attention is always kept on the 
content, and not on extraneous interface widgets. In 
addition to describing the conceptual model of StyleCam, 
its current implementation, and an example authored 
experience, we also present the results of an evaluation 
involving real users.

INTRODUCTION
Computer graphics has reached the stage where 3D models 
can be created and rendered, often in real time on 
commodity hardware, at a fidelity that is almost 
indistinguishable from the real thing. As such, it should be 
feasible at the consumer level to use 3D models rather than 
2D images to represent or showcase various physical 
artifacts. Indeed, as an example, many product 
manufacturers' websites are beginning to supply not only
professionally produced 2D images of their products, but 
also ways to view their products in 3D. Unfortunately, the 
visual and interactive experience provided by these 3D 
viewers currently fall short of the slick, professionally 
produced 2D images of the same items. For example, the 
quality of 2D imagery in an automobile's sales brochure 
typically provides a richer and more compelling 
presentation of that automobile to the user than the 
interactive 3D experiences provided on the manufacturer's 
website. If these 3D viewers are to replace, or at the very 
least be at par with, the 2D imagery, eliminating this
r,
viewpoint in the scene
difference in quality is critical.
The reasons for the poor quality of these 3D viewers fall 
roughly into two categories. First, 2D imagery is usually 
produced by professional artists and photographers who are 
skilled at using this well-established artform to convey 
information, feelings, or experiences, whereas creators of 
3D models do not necessarily have the same established 
skills and are working in an evolving medium. Howeve
this problem will work itself out as the medium matures.
The second issue is more troublesome. In creating 2D 
images a photographer can carefully control most of the 
elements that make up the shot including lighting and 
viewpoint, in an attempt to ensure that a viewer receives the 
intended message. In contrast, 3D viewers typically allow 
the user to interactively move their
to view any part of the 3D model.

Figure 1. StyleCam authored elements


Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
UIST'02, October 27-30, 2002, Paris, FRANCE. 
Copyright 2002 ACM 1-58113-488-6/02/0010...$5.00.

Volume 4, Issue 2
101
This results in a host of problems: a user may "get lost" in 
the scene, view the model from awkward angles that 
present it in poor light, miss seeing important features, 
experience frustration at controlling their navigation, etc. 
As such, given that the author of the 3D model does not 
have control over all aspects of what the user eventually 
sees, they cannot ensure that 3D viewing conveys the 
intended messages. In the worse case, the problems in 3D 
viewing produce an experience completely opposite to the 
authors intentions!
The goal of our present research is to develop a system, 
which we call StyleCam (Figure 1), where users viewing 
3D models can be guaranteed a certain level of quality in 
terms of their visual and interactive experience. Further, we 
intend that the system should not only avoid the problems 
suggested earlier, but also have the capability to make the 
interactive experience adhere to particular visual styles. For 
example, with StyleCam one should be able to produce an 
interactive viewing experience for a 3D model of an 
automobile "in the style of" the television commercial for 
that same automobile. Ultimately, a high-level goal of our 
research is to produce interactive 3D viewing experiences 
where, to use an old saying from the film industry, "every 
frame is a Rembrandt".
1.1.  Author vs. User Control
Central to our research is differentiating between the 
concept of authoring an interactive 3D experience versus 
authoring a 3D model which the user subsequently views 
using general controls. If we look at the case of a typical 
3D viewer on the web, in terms of interaction, the original 
author of the 3D scene is limited to providing somewhat 
standard camera controls such as pan, tumble and zoom. 
Essentially, control of the viewpoint is left up to the user 
and the author has limited influence on the overall 
experience.
From an author's perspective this is a significant 
imbalance. If we view an interactive experience by 
cinematic standards, an author (or director) of a movie has 
control over several major elements: content/art direction, 
shading/lighting, viewpoint, and pacing. It is these elements 
that determine the overall visual style of a movie. However, 
in the interactive experience provided by current 3D 
viewers, by placing control of the viewpoint completely in 
the hands of the user, the author has surrendered control of 
two major elements of visual style: viewpoint and pacing.
Thus we desire a method for creating 3D interactive 
experiences where an author can not only determine the 
content and shading but also the viewpoints and pacing. 
However, intrinsic in any interactive system is some degree 
of user control and therefore, more accurately, our desire is 
to allow the author to have methods to significantly 
influence the viewpoints and pacing in order to create 
particular visual styles. Thus, we hope to strike a better 
balance between author and user control. In order to 
achieve this end, StyleCam incorporates an innovative
interaction technique that seamlessly integrates spatial 
camera control with the temporal control of animation 
playback.

CONCEPTUAL MODEL
In order to provide author control or influence over 
viewpoints and pacing, we need a way for an author to 
express the viewpoints and the types of pacing they are 
interested in. Thus we have developed three main elements 
upon which our StyleCam approach is based.
1.  Camera surfaces ­ an author-created surface used to
constrain the users' movement of the viewpoint
2.  Animation clips ­ an author-created set of visual
sequences and effects whose playback may be 
controlled by the user. These can include:  
·  sophisticated camera movements.
·  Slates ­ 2D media such as images, movies,
documents, or web pages.
·  visual effects such as fades, wipes, and edits.
·  animation of elements in the scene.
3.  Unified UI technique ­ The user utilizes a single
method of interaction (dragging) to control the 
viewpoint, animation clips, and the transitions between 
camera surfaces.
2.1.  Camera Surfaces
In the motion picture industry a money-shot is a shot with a 
particular viewpoint that a director has deemed "important" 
in portraying a story or in setting the visual style of a 
movie. Similarly, in advertising, money-shots are those 
which are the most effective in conveying the intended 
message. We borrow these concepts of a money-shot for 
our StyleCam system. Our money-shots are viewpoints that 
an author can use to broadly determine what a user will see.
Further, we use the concept of a camera surface as 
introduced by Hanson and Wernert
[19, 36]
. When on a
camera surface, the virtual camera's spatial movement is 
constrained to that surface. Further, each camera surface is 
defined such that they incorporate a single money-shot. 
Figure 2 illustrates this notion.
Camera surfaces can be used for various purposes. A small 
camera surface can be thought of as an enhanced money-shot
where the user is allowed to move their viewpoint a bit 
in order to get a sense of the 3-dimensionality of what they 
are looking at.  Alternatively, the shape of the surface could 
be used to provide some dramatic camera movements, for 
example, sweeping across the front grill of a car. The key 
idea is that camera surfaces allow authors to conceptualize, 
visualize, and express particular ranges of viewpoints they 
deem important.
Intrinsic in our authored interactions is the notion that 
multiple camera surfaces can be used to capture multiple 
money-shots. Thus authors have the ability to influence a 
user's viewpoint broadly, by adding different camera 
surfaces, or locally by adjusting the shape of a camera
102
Volume 4, Issue 2
surface to allow a user to navigate through a range of 
viewpoints which are similar to a single particular money-shot
. For example, as shown in Figure 2, camera surfaces at 
the front and rear of the car provide two authored 
viewpoints of these parts of the car in which a user can 
"move around a bit" to get a better sense of the shape of the 
front grille and rear tail design.

Figure 2. Camera surfaces. The active camera is at the 
money-shot viewpoint on the first camera surface.

The rate at which a user moves around on a camera surface 
(Control-Display gain) can dramatically affect the style of 
the experience. In order to allow an author some control 
over visual pacing, we provide the author with the ability to 
control the rate at which dragging the mouse changes the 
camera position as it moves across a camera surface. The 
intention is that increasing/decreasing this gain ratio results 
in slower/faster camera movement and this will influence 
how fast a user moves in the scene, which contributes to a 
sense of pacing and visual style. For example, if small 
mouse movements cause large changes in viewpoint this 
may produce a feeling of fast action while large mouse 
movement and slow changes in movement produce a slow, 
flowing quality. Figure 3 illustrates an example of variable 
control-display gain, where the gain increases as the camera 
gets closer to the right edge of the camera surface.

Figure 3. Variable control-display gain on a camera surface
2.2.  Animation Clips
To support transitions between two camera surfaces, we use 
animation clips as illustrated in Figure 4. An animation clip 
can be thought of as a "path" between the edges of camera 
surfaces. When a user navigates to the edge of a camera 
surface, this triggers an animation. When the animation 
ends, they resume navigating at the destination camera
surface. One obvious type of animation between the camera 
surfaces would simply be an automatic interpolation of the 
camera moving from its start location on the first camera 
surface to its end location on the second camera surface 
(Figure 4a). This is similar to what systems such as VRML 
do. While our system supports these automatic interpolated 
animations, we also allow for authored, stylized, 
animations. These authored animations can be any visual 
sequence and pacing, and are therefore opportunities for 
introducing visual style. For example, in transitioning from 
one side of the car to the other, the author may create a 
stylized camera animation which pans across the front of 
the car, while closing in on a styling detail like a front grille 
emblem (Figure 4b).
The generality of using animation clips allows the author 
the stylistic freedom of completely abandoning the camera-movement
metaphor for transitions between surfaces and 
expressing other types of visual sequences. Thus animation 
clips are effective mechanisms for introducing slates -- 2D 
visuals which are not part of the 3D scene but are 
momentarily placed in front of the viewing camera as it 
moves from one camera surface to another (Figure 4c). For 
example, moving from a view of the front of the car to the 
back of the car may be accomplished using a 2D image 
showing the name of the car. This mechanism allows the 
use of visual elements commonly found in advertising such 
as real action video clips and rich 2D imagery. In the 
computer realm, slates may also contain elements such as 
documents or webpages.

Figure 4. Three example animated transitions between 
camera surfaces. (a) automatic transition, (b) authored 
stylized transition, (c) slate transition.

The use of animation clips also allows for typical visual 
transitions effects such as cross fades, wipes etc.
In addition to using animation clips for transitions between 
camera surfaces, StyleCam also supports the animation of 
elements in the 3D scene. These scene element animations 
can occur separately or concurrently with transition 
animations. For example, while the animation clip for the 
visual transition may have the camera sweeping down the 
side of the car, an auxiliary animation may open the trunk 
to reveal cargo space.
Volume 4, Issue 2
103
The animation of scene elements can also be used to affect 
extremely broad changes. For example, entire scene 
transitions (similar to level changes in video games) may 
occur when a user hits the edge of particular camera 
surface.
At the author's discretion, temporal control of animation 
clips can either be under user control or uninterruptable.
Overall, in terms of visual expression, these varying types 
of animation clips allow an author to provide rich visual 
experiences and therefore significantly influence the pacing 
and style of a user's interaction.
2.3.  Unified User Interaction Technique
While animation clips are effective for providing a means 
to move between camera surfaces and introduce visual 
styling elements, they also highlight the fundamental issue 
of arbitrating between user control and system control. At 
the heart of our system are two distinct types of behavior: 
1) user control of the viewpoint, and 2) playback of 
animation clips. In other systems these two types of 
behavior are treated as distinct interactions. Specifically, 
the user must stop dragging the camera viewpoint, then 
click on something in the interface to trigger the animation, 
dividing their attention and interrupting the visual flow. In 
our system we wanted to use animations as a seamless way 
of facilitating movement between camera surfaces. Thus we 
needed a mechanism for engaging these animations that did 
not require an explicit mouse click to trigger animation. 
Ideally we wanted to leave the user with the impression that 
they "dragged" from one camera surface to another even 
though the transition between the surfaces was 
implemented as an authored animation.
These two behaviors are fundamentally different in that 
viewpoint control is spatial navigation and animation 
control is temporal navigation. From a user interaction 
standpoint, spatial behavior can be thought of as "dragging 
the camera" while temporal control is "dragging a time 
slider" or "scrubbing". Given this we required an 
interaction model which allowed these two types of drags 
to be combined together in a way that was well defined, 
controllable, and corresponded to user's expectations.
Figure 5, which uses the finite-state-machine model to 
describe interaction as introduced by
[5, 26]
, shows the
interaction model we developed. The key feature of this 
model is the ability to transition back and forth from spatial 
to temporal control during a contiguous drag. As a user 
drags the camera across a camera surface (State 1, Spatial 
Navigation) and hits the edge of the surface, a transition is 
made to dragging an invisible time slider (State 2, 
Temporal Navigation). As the user continues to drag, the 
drag controls the location in the animation clip, assuming 
that the author has specified the clip to be under user 
control. Upon reaching the end of the animation, a 
transition is made back to dragging the camera, however, 
on a different, destination camera surface (State 1).
Button Up
Clip Finished
Button Up
State
0
State
1
State
2
State
3
Button
Down
Enter
Surface
Exit
Surface
Button
Down
Tracking
Dragging
in Space
Dragging
in Time
Tracking
during
Automatic
Playback
Stop
Playback
Spatial Navigation
Temporal Navigation

Figure 5. StyleCam interaction model.

The interaction model also handles a variety of reasonable 
variations on this type of dragging behavior. A user may 
stop moving when dragging an animation clip, thus pausing 
the animation. If, however, when in State 2 the user 
releases the mouse button during a drag, automatic 
playback is invoked to carry the user to the next camera 
surface (State 3). Should the user press the mouse button 
during this automatic playback, playback is stopped and 
temporal control by the user is resumed (return to State 2). 
We found in practice that this interaction design enhanced 
the user's feeling of being in control throughout the entire 
experience.
DESIGN RATIONALE
At first glance, it may appear that the incorporation of 
animation clips into StyleCam unnecessarily complicates its 
authoring and use. After all, without animated transitions, 
we would not have had to develop an interaction technique 
that blended between spatial and temporal control. Indeed, 
when we first began our research, our hope was to create a 
system that simply involved spatial control of a constrained 
camera.
Our first variation used a single camera surface that 
surrounded the 3D object of interest. The camera was 
constrained to remain normal to this single camera surface 
at all times. While this gave the author more control than 
using a simple unconstrained camera, we found that it was 
difficult to author a single camera surface that encompassed 
all the desirable viewpoints and interesting transitions 
between those viewpoints. In order to guarantee desirable 
viewpoints, we introduced the concept of money-shots that 
were placed on the single camera surface. The parameters 
of the camera were then determined based on its location on 
the camera surface and a weighted average of the 
surrounding money-shots. At this point, it was still difficult 
to author what the user would see when not directly on a 
money-shot. In other words, while money-shots worked 
well, the transitions between them worked poorly.
To address this problem of unsatisfactory transitions, we 
first replaced the concept of a single global camera surface 
with separate local camera surfaces for each money-shot.
104
Volume 4, Issue 2
Then, to define transitions between these local camera 
surfaces, we introduced the idea of animating the camera. 
This led to the use of the three types of animation clips as 
described earlier. Simply playing back the animation clips 
between camera surfaces gave users the sense that they lost 
control during this period. To maintain the feeling of 
continuous control throughout, we developed our integrated 
spatial-temporal interaction technique.

AN EXAMPLE EXPERIENCE
We illustrate how StyleCam operates by an example. 
Figure 6 illustrates the system components and how they 
react to user input, as well as screen shots of what the user 
actually sees. The user starts by dragging on a camera 
surface (position A). The path A-B shows the camera being 
dragged on the surface (spatial navigation). At B, the user 
reaches the edge of the camera surface and this launches an 
animation that will transition the user from B to E. The zigzag
path from B to D indicates that the user is scrubbing 
time on the animation (temporal navigation). Position C 
simply illustrates an intermediate point in the animation 
that gets seen three times during the interaction. At position 
D, the user releases the mouse button, whereupon the 
system automatically completes playing back the remainder 
of the animation at the authored pacing. At position E, the
user enters another camera surface and resumes spatial 
navigation of the camera as shown by path E-F. When the 
user exits this camera surface at position F, another 
animation is launched that will transition the user to 
position J. Since the user releases the mouse button at 
position F, the animation from F to J is played back at the 
authored pacing. Since this animation is a slate animation, 
the intermediate shots at positions G, H, and I along the 
path F to J are of slates containing information on the car 
fading in and out as the camera pans over the top of the car. 
The net result of this StyleCam experience is a view of the 
car that is far more visually rich and influenced by an 
author who intends to convey a certain message, rather than 
using simple camera controls as is typical in current 3D 
viewers.
RELATED WORK
Much prior research has explored camera techniques for 3D 
virtual environments. Many of the techniques use a 2D 
mouse or stylus as an input device and introduce metaphors 
to assist the user. Perhaps the most ubiquitous metaphor, 
the cinematic camera, enables users to tumble, track and 
dolly a viewpoint. Various other metaphors have been 
explored by researchers, including orbiting and flying
[32]
,
through-the-lens control
[18]
, points and areas of interests

Figure 6. Example StyleCam experience. Top: system components and their reaction to user input. Bottom: what the user sees.
Volume 4, Issue 2
105
[22]
, using constraints [24, 29], drawing a path
[21]
, two-handed
techniques
[1, 38]
, and combinations of techniques
[30, 37]. Bowman et. al. present taxonomies and 
evaluations of various schemes
[3, 4]
.
Other techniques involve automatic framing of the areas of 
interest as typically found in game console based adventure 
games which use a "chase airplane" metaphor for a third 
person perspective. Systems that utilize higher degree-of-freedom
input devices offer additional control and 
alternative metaphors have been investigated, including 
flying
[7, 34]
, eyeball-in-hand
[35]
, and worlds in miniature
[31]
. The major difference between this body of prior
research and our work is that we attempt to give the author 
substantially more influence over the types of views and 
transitions between them as the user navigates in the virtual 
space.
Beyond techniques for navigating the scene, extra 
information can also be provided to aid navigation. These 
include global maps in addition to local views
[12, 14]
, and
various landmarks
[9, 33]
. Others have investigated
integrating global and local views, using various distorted 
spaces including "fisheye" views
[6, 15]
. At present, in an
attempt to keep the visual space uncluttered, our work does 
not have mechanisms for providing global information to 
the user, however, this is something we may incorporate as 
our system progresses.
Approaches which give the author more influence include 
guided tours where camera paths are prespecified for the 
end user to travel along. Galyean [17] proposes a "river 
analogy" where a user, on a metaphorical boat, can deviate 
from the guided path, the river, by steering a conceptual 
"rudder". Fundamental work by Hanson and Wernert
[19,
36]
proposes "virtual sidewalks" which are authored by
constructing virtual surfaces and specifying gaze direction, 
vistas, and procedural events (e.g., fog and spotlights) along 
the sidewalk. Our system builds upon the guided tour and 
virtual sidewalk ideas but differs by providing authoring 
elements that enable a much more stylized experience. 
Specifically, we offer a means of presenting 3D, 2D, and 
temporal media experiences through a simple, unified, 
singular user interaction technique that supports both 
spatial and temporal navigation.
Robotic planning algorithms have been used to assist or 
automatically create a guided tour of a 3D scene, in some 
cases resulting in specific behaviors trying to satisfy goals 
and constraints
[10, 11]
. Individual camera framing of a
scene has been used to assist in viewing or manipulation 
tasks
[27]
. Rules can be defined for cameras to
automatically frame a scene that follow cinematic 
principles such as keeping the virtual actors visible in the 
scene; or following the lead actor
[20]
. Yet another system
[2]
allows authors to define storyboard frames and the
system defines a set of virtual cameras in the 3D scene to 
support the visual composition. This previous work assists 
in the authoring aspects by ceding some control to the
system. Our work too involves some automatic system 
control, but we emphasize author control.
Image based virtual reality environments such as 
QuicktimeVR
[8]
utilize camera panning and zooming and
allow users to move to defined vista points. The driving 
metaphor has also been used for navigating interactive 
video, as seen in the Movie-Maps system
[23]
. More
recently, the Steerable Media project
[25]
for interactive
television aims to retain the visual aesthetic of existing 
television but increase the level of user interactivity. The 
user is given the ability to control the content progression 
by seamlessly integrating video with augmented 2D and 3D 
graphics. While our goals are similar in that we hope to 
enhance the aesthetics of the visual experience, we differ in 
that our dominant media type is 3D graphics with 
augmented temporal media (animations and visual effects) 
and traditional 2D media (video, still images).
Lastly, we note that widely available 3D viewers or 
viewing technologies such as VRML, Cult3D, Shockwave, 
Viewpoint, Virtools, and Pulse3D, are becoming very 
popular but offer the standard camera controls of vista 
points, track, tumble, and zoom. We hope our explorations 
will ultimately assist in offering new experience and 
interaction approaches for future incarnations of these 3D 
viewers.
IMPLEMENTATION
StyleCam is implemented using Alias|wavefront's MAYA 
3D modeling and animation package. We use MAYA to 
author the 3D content to be visualized, the required camera 
surfaces, animation clips, and required associations 
between them. A custom written MAYA plugin allows the 
user to control their view of the 3D content based on their 
mouse input and the authored camera surfaces, animation 
clips, and associations.
The following description of our implementation assumes 
some knowledge of MAYA, although we have endeavoured 
to be as general as possible without sacrificing accuracy.
6.1.  Authoring
First, money-shots are created by defining a MAYA camera 
with specific position, orientation, and other camera 
parameters. Then, a camera surface which intersects the 
position of the money-shot camera is defined by creating an 
appropriate non-trimmed NURBS surface within MAYA. 
To include an optional camera look-at point, the author 
simply defines a point in 3D space (using a MAYA 
locator). Finally, to make these components easily locatable 
by the plugin, they are grouped under a named MAYA 
node within its dependency graph.
Then, StyleCam animation clips are created as one would 
normally create animations in MAYA, using its TRAX 
non-linear animation editor. Animation clips at this stage 
are given meaningful, consistent, names in order to 
facilitate their identification later when associating them 
with events.
106
Volume 4, Issue 2
StyleCam allows the author to create scripts and associate 
them with events. Supported events are session startup, 
camera surface entry, camera surface exit, and camera 
surface timeout (Figure 7).
We implement variable control-display gain on a camera 
surface (Figure 3) by varying the separation between the 
isoparms on the NURBS surface.
As shown in Figure 4, StyleCam supports three types of 
transitions: automatic, authored, and slate.

Automatic transitions are those that smoothly move the 
camera from one camera surface to another without 
requiring any authored animation clips. This is done by 
having the system perform quaternion
[28]
interpolation of
camera orientation, combined quaternion and linear 
interpolation of camera position, and linear interpolation of 
other camera properties such as focal length. Using 
quaternion interpolation ensures smooth changes in 
orientation while defining a smooth arcing path for the 
position. At each time step in the transition, two 
quaternions representing the required fractional rotations of 
the position and orientation vectors of the camera are 
calculated and applied to the source vectors. In addition, the 
magnitude of the position vector is adjusted by linear 
interpolation between the source and destination position 
vector magnitudes. The result is a series of intermediate 
camera positions and orientations as Figure 8 illustrates.

Figure 7. StyleCam events

The session startup event is triggered only once when the 
user initially begins using StyleCam to view a scene. Exit 
events are triggered when the user leaves a camera surface 
from one of four directions. Associated scripts can specify 
destination camera surfaces and types of transitions to be 
performed. Time-out events are triggered when the mouse 
is idle for a given duration while on a particular camera 
surface, and can be used to launch an automatic 
presentation. StyleCam's event and script mechanism 
provides for the use of logic to dynamically alter the 
presentation. For example, scripts can ensure that some 
surfaces are only visited once, while others are shown only 
after certain surfaces have already been visited.
6.2.  Interaction
When the StyleCam plugin is activated, the first money-shot
of the first camera surface is used as the initial view. If 
a look-at point is defined for this camera surface, the 
orientation of the user camera is set such that the camera 
points directly at the look-at point. Otherwise, the 
orientation is set to the normal of the camera surface at the 
money-shot viewpoint's position.
Figure 8. Combined quaternion and linear interpolation

Authored transitions involve the playback of preauthored 
animation clips. This gives the author complete control 
over the user experience during the transition including the 
pacing, framing and visual effects.
User's mouse movements and button presses are monitored 
by the StyleCam plugin.  Mouse drags result in the camera 
moving along the current camera surface. Specifically, for a 
given mouse displacement (dx, dy), the new position of the 
camera on the camera surface (in uv-coordinates local to 
the camera surface) is given by
Slate transitions are a special case of authored transitions. 
Used to present 2D media, slate transitions are authored by 
placing an image plane in front of the camera as it 
transitions between camera surfaces. Various visual effects 
can be achieved by using multiple image planes 
simultaneously and by animating transparency and other 
parameters of these image planes. While the slate transition 
is in progress, the camera is simultaneously being smoothly 
interpolated towards the destination camera surface. This 
essentially allows for a "soft" fade from a camera view, to a 
slate, and back, as Figure 9 illustrates.
(u1,v1) = (u0,v0) + c*(dx, dy)
where (u0, v0) is the last position of the camera, and c is the 
gain constant. If either the u or v coordinate of the resulting 
position is not within the range [0,1], the camera has left 
the current camera surface. At this point, the author-scripted
logic is executed to determine the next step. First, 
the destination money-shot is resolved. Next, an 
appropriate transition is performed to move to the next 
camera surface.
Volume 4, Issue 2
107


Figure 9. Slate transitions

StyleCam supports temporal control or "scrubbing" of 
animations. During navigation mode, the user's mouse 
drags control the camera's position on the camera surface. 
However, when the user moves off a camera surface into an 
animated transition, mouse drags control the (invisible) 
timeslider of the animation. Time is advanced when the 
mouse is dragged in the same direction that the camera 
exited the camera surface and reversed if the directions are 
also reversed. When the mouse button is released, the 
system takes over time management and smoothly ramps 
the time steps towards the animation's original playback 
rate.

Our present implementation supports scrubbing only for 
automatic transitions. Authored and slate transitions are 
currently uninterruptible. There is however no technical 
reason why all  transitions cannot support scrubbing. In 
future versions we intend to give the author the choice of 
determining whether or not any given transition is 
scrubable. This is important since in some cases it may be 
desirable to force the animation to playback uninterrupted 
at a certain rate.
EVALUATION
We conducted an informal user study to get a sense of 
users' initial reactions to using StyleCam. Seven 
participants, three of whom had experience with 3D 
graphics applications and camera control techniques, and 
four who had never used a 3D application or camera 
controls, were asked to explore a 3D car model using 
StyleCam. In order to ensure the study resembled our 
intended casual usage scenario, we gave participants only 
minimal instructions. We explained the click-and-drag 
action required to manipulate the camera, a brief rationale 
for the study, and to imagine they were experiencing an 
interactive advertisement for that car. We did not identify 
the various components (camera surfaces, animated 
transitions, etc) nor give any details on them. This was 
deliberately done so that the participants could experience 
these components in action for themselves and give us 
feedback without knowing in advance of their existence.
One very promising result was that none of the participants 
realized that they were switching between controlling the
camera and controlling the time slider on the animations. 
They felt that they had the same type of control throughout, 
indicating that our blending between spatial and temporal 
control worked remarkably well. Also the simplicity of the 
interaction technique ­ essentially a single click and drag 
action ­ was immediately understood and usable by all our 
users.
Another reaction from all the participants was that, to 
varying degrees, they sometimes felt that they were not in 
control of the interaction when the uninterruptable 
animations occurred. This was particularly acute when the 
information in the animations seemed unrelated to their 
current view. In these cases, participants indicated that they 
had no idea what triggered these animations and were often 
annoyed at the sudden interruptions. However when the 
information was relevant the interruptions were not as 
annoying and often actually appreciated. In some cases 
participants indicated that they would have liked to be able 
to replay the animation or to have it last longer. This 
highlights the importance of carefully authoring the 
intermingling of uninterruptable animations with the rest of 
the interaction experience.
Participants also indicated that they would have liked the 
ability to click on individual parts of the car model in order 
to inspect them more closely. This request is not surprising 
since we made no effort in our current implement to 
support pointing. However, we believe that in future 
research StyleCam could be extended to include pointing.
As we expected, all the participants with prior 3D graphics 
camera experience stated that they at times would have 
liked full control of the camera, in addition to the 
constrained control we provided. Participants without this 
prior experience, however, did not ask for this directly 
although they indicated that there were some areas of the 
car model that they would have liked to see but could not 
get to. However, this does not necessarily imply full control 
of the camera is required. We believe that this issue can be 
largely alleviated at the authoring phase by ascertaining 
what users want to see for a particular model and ensuring 
that those features are accessible via the authored camera 
surfaces. Interestingly, the participant with the most 3D 
graphics experience commented that  the automatic 
transitions and smooth camera paths during those 
transitions were very good and that "for those who don't 
know 3D and stuff, this would be very good"!

DISCUSSION & CONCLUSIONS
Central to our StyleCam system is the integration of spatial 
and temporal controls into a single user interaction model. 
The implications of this interaction model go far beyond a 
simple interaction technique. The blending of spatial and 
temporal control presents a completely new issue that an 
author needs to understand and consider when creating 
these interactive visual experiences. As evident from the 
comments of our users, temporal control can feel very 
much like spatial control even when scrubbing backwards
108
Volume 4, Issue 2
in an animation when the animation consists of moving the 
viewing camera around the central object of interest. 
However, if the animation is not around the central object 
of interest, for example in some of our slate animations, 
temporal control can produce very different sensations. 
These include the feeling of moving backwards in time, 
interruption of a well paced animation, jarring or ugly 
visuals, and sometimes even nonsensical content.
As a result, the author needs to be extremely cognizant of 
these artefacts and make design decisions as to when and 
where to relinquish control - and how much control - to the 
user. At one extreme, the author can specify that certain 
animations are completely uninterruptible by the user. In 
the experience we authored for our user study, we included 
several of these types of transitions. As discussed earlier, 
whether users favored this depended heavily on the content. 
In other words, in some cases, as authors, we did not make 
the right decision. Further improvements could include 
partially interruptable animations. For example, we may not 
allow movement backwards in time but allow the user to 
control the forward pacing. This will largely solve the 
nonsensical content problem but may still result in 
occasionally jarring visuals.
If we intend to support these various types of control, we 
must also be able to set the users' expectations of what type 
of control they have at any given time. It is clear that the 
current StyleCam switching between spatial and temporal 
control without any explicit indication to the user that a 
switch is happening works in most cases. In the cases 
where it fails, either the visual content itself should indicate 
what control is possible, or some explicit mechanism is 
required to inform the user of the current or upcoming 
control possibilities. In addition to the obvious solution of 
using on-screen visual indicators (e.g., changing cursors) to 
indicate state, future research could include exploring "hint-ahead"
mechanisms that indicate upcoming content if the 
user chooses to stay on their current course of travel. For 
example, as the user reaches the edge of a camera surface, a 
"voice-over" could say something like "now we're heading 
towards the engine of the car". Alternatively, a visual 
"signpost" could fade-in near the cursor location to convey 
this information. These ideas coincide with research that 
states that navigation routes must be discoverable by the 
user
[16]
.
It is very clear from our experiences with StyleCam that the 
user's viewing experience is highly dependent on the talent 
and skill of the author. It is likely that skills from movie 
making, game authoring, advertising, and theme park 
design would all assist in authoring compelling 
experiences. However, we also realize that authoring skills 
from these other genres do not necessarily directly translate 
due to the unique interaction aspects of StyleCam.
While StyleCam has the appropriate components for 
creating compelling visual experiences, it is still currently a 
research prototype that requires substantial skills with
MAYA. We envision a more author-friendly tool that is 
based on the conceptual model of StyleCam.
Some future avenues that we intend to explore include 
supporting soundtracks, extensions to enable pointing to 
elements in the 3D scene, and mechanisms for authoring 
animation paths using alternate techniques such as 
Chameleon
[13]
.
Finally, it is important to note that StyleCam is not limited 
to product or automobile visualization. Other domains such 
as visualization of building interiors and medical 
applications could also utilize the ideas presented in this 
paper. Figures 10, 11, and 12 illustrate some examples.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Scott Guy and Miles Menegon for assistance in 
figure and video creation.

REFERENCES
1.  Balakrishnan, R., & Kurtenbach, G. (1999). Exploring
bimanual camera control and object manipulation in 3D 
graphics interfaces. ACM CHI 1999 Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems. p. 56-63.
2.  Bares, W., McDermott, S., Boudreaux, C., & Thainimit,
S. (2000). Virtual 3D camera composition from frame 
constraints. ACM Multimedia. p. 177-186.
3.  Bowman, D.A., Johnson, D.B., & Hodges, L.F. (1997).
Travel in immersive virtual environments. IEEE 
VRAIS'97 Virtual Reality Annual International 
Symposium. p. 45-52.
4.  Bowman, D.A., Johnson, D.B., & Hodges, L.F. (1999).
Testbed environment of virtual environment interaction. 
ACM VRST'99 Symposium on Virtual Reality Software 
and Technologies. p. 26-33.
5.  Buxton, W., ed. Three-state model of graphical input.
Human-computer interaction - INTERACT'90, ed. D. 
Diaper. 1990, Elsevier Science Publishers B. V. (North-Holland
): Amsterdam. 449-456.
6.  Carpendale, M.S.T., & Montagnese, C.A. (2001). A
framework for unifying presentation space. ACM 
UIST'2001 Symposium on User Interface Software and 
Technology. p. 61-70.
7.  Chapman, D., & Ware, C. (1992). Manipulating the
future: predictor based feedback for velocity control in 
virtual environment navigation. ACM I3D'92 
Symposium on Interactive 3D Graphics. p. 63-66.
8.  Chen, S.E. (1995). QuickTime VR: An image-based
approach to virtual environment navigation. ACM 
SIGGRAPH'95 Conference on Computer Graphics and 
Interactive Techniques. p. 29-38.
9.  Darken, R., & Sibert, J. (1996). Wayfinding strategies
and behaviours in large virtual worlds. ACM CHI'96 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 
p. 142-149.
Volume 4, Issue 2
109
10. Drucker, S.M., Galyean, T.A., & Zeltzer, D. (1992).
CINEMA: A system for procedural camera movements. 
ACM  Symposium on Interactive 3D Graphics. p. 67-70.
11. Drucker, S.M., & Zeltzer, D. (1994). Intelligent camera
control in a virtual environment. Graphics Interface. p. 
190-199.
12. Elvins, T., Nadeau, D., Schul, R., & Kirsh, D. (1998).
Worldlets: 3D thumbnails for 3D browsing. ACM 
CHI'98 Conf. on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 
p. 163-170.
13. Fitzmaurice, G.W. (1993). Situated information spaces
and spatially aware palmtop computers. 
Communications of the ACM, 36(7). p. 38-49.
14. Fukatsu, S., Kitamura, Y., Masaki, T., & Kishino, F.
(1998). Intuitive control of bird's eye overview images 
for navigation in an enormous virtual environment. 
ACM VRST'98 Sympoisum on Virtual Reality Software 
and Technology. p. 67-76.
15. Furnas, G. (1986). Generalized fisheye views. ACM
CHI 1986 Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems. p. 16-23.
16. Furnas, G. (1997). Effective view navigation. ACM
CHI'97 Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems. p. 367-374.
17. Galyean, T.A. (1995). Guided navigation of virtual
environments.  ACM I3D'95 Symposium on Interactive 
3D Graphics. p. 103-104.
18. Gliecher, M., & Witkin, A. (1992). Through-the-lens
camera control. ACM SIGGRAPH' Conf. on Computer 
Graphics and Interactive Techniques. p. 331-340.
19. Hanson, A.J., & Wernet, E. (1997). Constrained 3D
navigation with 2D controllers. p. 175-182.
20. He, L., Cohen, M.F., & Salesin, D. (1996). The virtual
cinematographer: a paradigm for automatic real-time 
camera control and directing. ACM SIGGRAPH'96 
Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive 
Techniques. p. 217-224.
21. Igarashi, T., Kadobayashi, R., Mase, K., & Tanaka, H.
(1998). Path drawing for 3D walkthrough. ACM UIST 
1998 Symposium on User Interface Software and 
Technology. p. 173-174.
22. Jul, S., & Furnas, G. (1998). Critical zones in desert
fog: aids to multiscale navigation. ACM Symposium on 
User Interface Software and Technology. p. 97-106.
23. Lippman, A. (1980). Movie-maps: an application of the
optical videodisc to computer graphics. ACM 
SIGGRAPH'80 Conference on Computer Graphics and 
Interactive Techniques. p. 32-42.
24. Mackinlay, J., Card, S., & Robertson, G. (1990). Rapid
controlled movement through a virtual 3D workspace.
ACM SIGGRAPH 1990 Conference on Computer 
Graphics and Interactive Techniques. p. 171-176.
25. Marrin, C., Myers, R., Kent, J., & Broadwell, P. (2001).
Steerable media: interactive television via video 
synthesis. ACM Conference on 3D Technologies for the 
World Wide Web. p. 7-14.
26. Newman, W. (1968). A system for interactive graphical
programming.
AFIPS Spring Joint Computer
Conference. p. 47-54.
27. Phillips, C.B., Badler, N.I., & Granieri, J. (1992).
Automatic viewing control for 3D direct manipulation. 
ACM Symposium on Interactive 3D Graphics. p. 71-74.
28.
Shoemake, K. (1985). Animating rotation with 
quartenion curves. ACM SIGGRAPH Conf Computer 
Graphics & Interactive Techniques. p. 245-254.
29. Smith, G., Salzman, T., & Stuerzlinger, W. (2001). 3D
Scene manipulation with 2D devices and constraints. 
Graphics Interface. p. 135-142.
30. Steed, A. (1997). Efficient navigation around complex
virtual environments. ACM VRST'97 Conference on 
Virtual Reality Software and Technology. p. 173-180.
31. Stoakley, R., Conway, M., & Pausch, R. (1995). Virtual
reality on a WIM: Interactive worlds in miniature. ACM 
CHI 1995 Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems. p. 265-272.
32. Tan, D., Robertson, G., & Czerwinski, M. (2001).
Exploring 3D navigation: combining speed-coupled 
flying with orbiting. ACM CHI'2001 Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems. p. 418-425.
33. Vinson, N. (1999). Design guidelines for landmarks to
support navigation in virtual environments. ACM 
CHI'99 Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems. p. 278-285.
34. Ware, C., & Fleet, D. (1997). Context sensitve flying
interface.  ACM I3D'97 Symposium on Interactive 3D 
Graphics. p. 127-130.
35. Ware, C., & Osborne, S. (1990). Exploration and virtual
camera control in virtual three dimensional 
environments.  ACM I3D'90 Symposium on Interactive 
3D Graphics. p. 175-183.
36. Wernert, E.A., & Hanson, A.J. (1999). A framework for
assisted exploration with collaboration. IEEE 
Visualization. p. 241-248.
37. Zeleznik, R., & Forsberg, A. (1999). UniCam - 2D
Gestural Camera Controls for 3D Environments. ACM 
Symposium on Interactive 3D Graphics. p. 169-173.
38. Zeleznik, R., Forsberg, A., & Strauss, P. (1997). Two
pointer input for 3D interaction. ACM I3D Symposium 
on Interactive 3D Graphics. p. 115-120.
110
Volume 4, Issue 2
