Video-Streaming for Fast Moving Users in 3G Mobile Networks
ABSTRACT
The emergence of third-generation (
3G) mobile networks offers
new opportunities for the effective delivery of data with rich content
including multimedia messaging and video-streaming. Provided
that streaming services have proved highly successful over
stationary networks in the past, we anticipate that the same trend
will soon take place in
3G networks. Although mobile operators
currently make available pertinent services, the available resources
of the underlying networks for the delivery of rich data remain in-herently
constrained. At this stage and in light of large numbers
of users moving fast across cells,
3G networks may not be able
to warrant the needed quality-of-service requirements. The support
for streaming services necessitates the presence of content or media
servers properly placed over the
3G network; such servers essen-tially
become the source for streaming applications. Evidently, a
centralized approach in organizing streaming content might lead to
highly congested media-nodes which in presence of moving users
will certainly yield increased response times and jitter to user requests
. In this paper, we propose a workaround that enables
3G networks
to offer uninterrupted video-streaming services in the presence
of a large number of users moving in high-speed. At the same
time, we offer a distributed organization for the network's media-servers
to better handle over-utilization.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.4 [Systems and Software]: Information networks; H.3.5
[Online Information Services]: Data sharing; C.2.4 [Distributed
Systems
]: Distributed applications

General Terms
Algorithms, Design, Performance
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
MobiDE'05, June 12, 2005, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
Copyright 2005 ACM 1-59593-088-4/05/0006 ...
$
5.00.

INTRODUCTION
The third generation (
3G) mobile phone system UMTS enables
better quality and allows for more convenient use of multimedia
messaging and video-services by offering higher bandwidth and
lower latency than its GSM and GPRS predecessors [15, 1].
UMTS
furnishes upto 2Mbps rates for indoor and upto 384Kbps for outdoor
environments. Clearly, much improvement in terms of allo-cated
resources has been made for the handling of "rich" data including
multimedia messages and video-services. Nevertheless, the
available resources still present significant limitations for the scale
up of services when very large number of clients are present in a
cell of a network. Perhaps, the most daunting challenge comes from
moving users who access multimedia data and video feeds with the
help of their mobile phones and PDAs while traveling on either
private vehicles or mass transportation means such as commuter
trains and public busses. Evidently, a large number of concurrent
connections soliciting data resources in a cell and being handled
in real-time pose significant capacity problems for the underlying
3G network. The situation becomes even more challenging when
users attempt to follow streaming sources while on the move. We
consider streaming services to be of key importance as they will
ultimately offer information on demand for the moving user in any
geographic position and at any time. In order to facilitate video
streaming over
UMTS networks a number of issues have to be addressed
so that users do not experience delays and discontinuities
during playback. The two core aspects that require attention are
the variations of the available bandwidth as users enter and leave
cells as well as the effective management of handovers as roaming
users attach to different base-stations along their trajectory. The
problem of graceful transition when moving between base-stations
becomes more critical when the users are on high-speed motorways
. In this case, handovers become more frequent and traffic
load at successive base-stations may vary. In this paper, we outline
the above emerging problem and propose a scheme that allows for
not only improved network resource sharing but also for enhanced
management of streaming sources to the mobile user. It is expected
that base-stations are to transmit in different bitrates throughout the
journey of an individual as cells will undoubtedly present diverse
levels of congestion and availability of connections.
When considering vehicular users in general, one can exploit the
fact that the user's trajectory can be predicted in a satisfactory manner
. An early method to attain this goal is to keep an aggregate history
of observations made regarding the movement of users within
each cell [9]. Based on this information, probability density functions
for the prediction for the next-cell-to-move can be derived and
used. Traffic authorities imposed speed limits and road signals can
65
also assist in the more accurate estimation of a user's average speed.
In addition, the user's direction can be predicted reasonably well by
keeping track of her trajectory thus far. Although a model for precise
prediction is beyond the scope of this paper, we can assume
that there are already techniques that can offer a good estimation
of a moving user path. For instance, an individual's geographic
location could be tracked with the assistance of UMTS
Location
Service (LCS) [2] that can identify the cell that a user presently
appears in. If a user is moving along a highway, one could easily
estimate not only the direction of his movement but also his average
speed along a given trajectory. Finally, the soon anticipated incorporation
of Global Positioning System (GPS) receivers into mobile
phones through
A-GPS features [30] will help in the very accurate
user positioning and extraction of their movement characteristics.
It is our conjecture that at this stage, simply knowing the overall
direction of a user's trajectory in conjuction with the highway that
she travels on can ensure timely video-streaming and playout continuity
for users.
In our streaming environment, there exist three distinct types of
synergistic computing systems: media-servers, base-stations, and
user equipment. These systems are organized in three functional
layers as Figure 1 depicts. The role of the media-servers is to predominantly
manage content in a highly distributed fashion where
fast content retrieval and data resilience can be guaranteed. Base-stations
handle all user initiated connections to the
3G network and
through their channels offer users requested data. The last tier of
Figure 1 consists of cellular phones and PDAs equipped with appropriate
video-players and featuring minimal buffer capabilities to
support streaming.
Base Station
Media Server
Base Station
Base Station
Media Server
Base Station
WCDMA radio interface
Figure 1: Three-Tier Organization for Streaming Provision.
Media and base-stations are internetworked via high-speed wired
links while
UMTS offer wireless connections between user equipment
and base-stations. This distributed media-server architecture
provides for dividing of large video streams into multiple segments
[34, 14]. A media-server initially retrieves a solicited video
object either from its storage units or from another remote media-server
. In this paper, we take the approach that instead of transmitting
the entire object to a single base-station, we first segment it
and then forward its segments to the base-stations along the user's
path. Our rationale is that an individual base-station handles only a
section of the video file; the size of the section in discussion is commensurate
to the duration of a user's trip inside the cell. Clearly,
video-object segmentation reduces both network transmission costs
between media and base-stations and start-up latencies that users
experience upon cell entrance. On the other hand, segmentation
might get more complex if a user remains longer in a cell than
her estimated time and so she may face delays in the reception of
frames. We address this issue by continual monitoring of both user
speed and position and by doing so giving the base-station the option
to receive additional video increments and sufficiently feed a
user at all times.
Our work requires minimal buffer capabilities for mobile stations
so that a sufficient number of frames can be accommodated.
Buffer presence assures that the playout does not stop if the base-station
emits at lower bitrate due to
3G network congestion. We
propose a rate adaptation scheme which allows a base-station to
adjust its transmitting bitrate at any time according to base-station
load and the states of the client-side buffer. The
UMTS streaming
class defines that the bitrate assigned to a moving user is guaranteed
even though it might be less than the maximum video bitrate [15].
The base-station's decision of accepting a video streaming session
has an impact on all subsequent base-stations that follow up on the
video delivery process. While a streaming session is in progress,
the load of base-stations-to-service may dynamically change and
potentially lead to session drops. Such drops are highly undesirable
and we adopt a policy to address this issue. Our proposed scheme
gives a base-station the opportunity to appropriately alter the transmission
bitrate by taking into account the current base-station load
and simultaneously ensuring that the client buffer does not starve.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents
the overall system architecture and examines the interaction between
media-servers and base-stations. Section 3 proposes our bitrate
adaptation scheme and Section 4 discusses the results of our
preliminary experimentation. Finally, related work and conclusions
can be found in Sections 5 and 6 respectively.
MEDIA-SERVERS/BASE-STATIONS INTERACTION
The fast movement of users via different cells of the
3G network
imposes a set of new requirements for the entire video delivery
system. As the user relocates rapidly, she faces a high number
of handovers during her journey and, as a consequence, a large
video stream has to be fetched from different base-stations in order
to warrant continuous playback. As suggested earlier, we assume
the deployment of dedicated media-servers which undertake both
the storage and distribution of video-streams to underline base-stations
. It is imperative that media-servers, base-stations, and user-equipment
involved in a streaming session must cooperate in order
to guarantee QoS for the video reception of the moving individual
. In this section, we outline our overall architecture, discuss the
content delivery process that media-servers carry out, and present
specific algorithms for video segmentation and content distribution.
2.1
Architecture
The three distinct types of cooperative computing systems
(shown in Figure 1) organized in a multi-tier architecture constitute
our proposed streaming environment. We assume that base-stations
communicate with the mobile stations through the
WCDMA radio
interface [15]. Each cell of the
UMTS network is served by
a different base-station whose responsibility is to deliver the video
streams to its constituent mobile users. A streaming service necessitates
the use of media servers that will handle the storage and delivery
of video files [3]. Although we could adopt a centralized approach
to accommodate the media in delivery, high contention and
resource over-utilization would impact user request response times
greatly. Clearly a distributed approach that webs media-servers together
is required. High-speed wired communication means link
these servers and all share required meta-data structures.
66
Due to incurred costs and the fact that users move at high-speeds,
having a dedicated media server for each base-station would be a
poor decision. If the mobile user is traveling at a speed of 100 km/h
and the cell radius is 0.7 km, then he will pass through the given
cell in 50.4 seconds at maximum, assuming an hexagonal shape.
This implies that the number of frequent handovers taking place
increase the interaction among media-servers that will have to be
involved throughout the streaming session. Furthermore, in order
to avoid under-utilization of media-servers and strike a balance in
the aggregate use for facilitating streaming, we group
3G cells into
groups as Figure 2 depicts. This assignment is expected to happen
in a static manner although it could be modified to reflect emerging
new realities in the core network. In this regard, Figure 2 shows
a network layout in which sets of sixteen cells are configured to
function as a group. In this example, the mobile user is currently
in a cell of group
A
and is heading towards group
F
. The media-servers
that can be involved in the delivery of video objects are
A,
D, E
and
F
. The server
A
is expected to interact with server
D
,
D
with
E
, and
E
with
F
. In this chained-fashion, we anticipate that
the media servers notify each other about the streaming session of
the oncoming mobile user. In addition, the media-servers send and
receive in pipelined fashion the video object under transmission.
¢¡¤£¦¥
§
¨¦¡©
¤¡¦©¦
¢¡¤£¦¥
§
¨¡©
¡©
¢¡¤£¦¥
§
¨¡©
¤¡©
¢¡¤£¦¥
§
¨¡©
¤¡¦©!
¢¡¤£¦¥
§
¨¡©
¤¡¦©&quot;
#¡£¦¥
§
¨¡©
¡©$
%'&
(0)¦1324
¡576
¥
8¤§¤6
¥
98
#9¦@¤¥
A
¡
B
5¡©
Figure 2: Grouping of Cells
There may be other interactions as well. For instance, there must
be cooperation between media server
A
and
F
if the requested video
object is initially located at
F
. A media server accepts video requests
from base-stations residing in its group; if it does not currently
have the object it is responsible for locating ­using the meta­
data structure­ and fetching it. Due to the location awareness of our
approach, we assume that each server predominantly stores streams
specific to its own geographic area. For instance, if the route drawn
in Figure 2 crosses a county, video clips with showing traffic conditions
ahead in specific points may be requested. Similarly in a city
setting, such requests may entail multimedia location-based virtual
presentations.
2.2
Content Distribution
Provided that a media server has a video clip in place, a straightforward
approach would be to transmit the object into all base-stations
operating in cells located on or near-by the user's trajectory
. This is not only wasteful in both network and base-station
resources but also increases the user-perceived playout latency.
Therefore, we resort to using video segmentation [14], [21] in order
to reduce network transmission costs between the video-holding
media server and its subordinates base-stations. Segmentation also
decreases the start-up latency that users experience upon cell entrance
.
The length of a video-segment, denoted
S
t
, sent to each base-station
is proportional to the average time that the user is expected
to stay in the specific cell. The process of segmenting the video
streams into chunks of frames of specific duration assumes that the
media servers are aware of the underlying cell configuration. In
particular, a media-server has to be aware of the precise manner
with which a motorway cuts across its subordinate cells, the direction
as well as the speed of moving users. With this data available,
the media-server in discussion can approximate the time that a user
spends in a cell. For example, if a motorist moving at 100km/h has
just entered a cell and departs after traversing a 1km route portion,
the server can compute the duration of the user's stay to be at ap-proximately
36 seconds. The media-server can capitalize on this
very information to appropriately segment the streamed video; it
only dispatches enough frames for a playout period of 36 seconds.
The duration of a user's presence within a cell may vary according
to speed changes with clearly lower speeds leading to elongated
stays in the cell and vice versa. Should the speed be decreasing,
the base-station will ultimately require more frames from the media
server than the number predicted once the user appeared in the
cell. Such a request constitutes a "cache miss" which will not be
noted by the user if detected on time and acted upon by the coordinating
base-station. Imposing a minimum threshold in the number
of frames always available for delivery at a base-station may
help overcome such "cache-misses". Therefore, when the number
of frames awaiting transmission on a base-station falls below
the abovementioned threshold, the base-station signals its need for
additional frames to its overseeing media-server; should the latter
act upon this request, additional frames arrive on time at the base-station
for delivery. On the other hand, as soon as a user increases
speed, she will depart the cell extend earlier than initially anticipated
. The drawback here is that the media-server has provided
the base-station with more frames than those eventually needed.
During the handover process, the coordinating media-server has to
generate a video-fragment which in its opening contains frames that
have already been transmitted to the previous base-station but not-yet
-seen by the user.
Our approach allows a base-station to dynamically alter the
transmission bitrate according to its current load. Under light load,
a base-station may opt to increase the transmission rate for a specific
video-stream thus leading to potential frame shortage. To easily
avoid such shortage, we use the minimum allowed vehicle speed
to compute the size of the video-segment
S
t
to be transported to
base-stations:
S
t
=
Distance
M inimumSpeed
(1)
In most freeways there are authority-posted limits for minimum allowed
speed in each road segment. As media-servers are aware of
the geographic area that they serve, such minimum speed rates are
statically designated for each cell in their jurisdiction. Evidently,
the video-segment size that we potentially use as safety against
frame shortage is:
S
t
=
Distance
M inimumSpeed Distance
AverageSpeed
(2)
67
Algorithms 1 and 2 depict the video segmentation and distribution
that we follow in our media distribution. Upon a new video-streaming
request, we assume that the media-server can efficiently
retrieve the corresponding video-file either from local storage options
or remote servers via its low-latency/high-bandwidth wired
networking infrastructure. The identification of the user's current
location, the precompiled knowledge of the traveled distance within
a cell, in conjunction with the minimum allowed speed on pertinent
highway segments, permit for the estimation of the maximum
user stay
S
t
in a specific cell. Subsequently, the media-server can
create the first segment of frames needed for transmission via the
base-station to the requesting client. The size of a video-segment is
given by
V =
P
N
i=1
F
i
, where
F
i
is the size of the
i-th frame and
N is the number of frames in the segment; we can easily compute
N by multiplying the frame-rate (frames/second) with the duration
of stay in a cell
S
t
.
Algorithm 1
Video Segmentation at Media-Server
1: Get Minimum User Speed MinSpeed
2: Get PathLength in cell range
3:
p  last frame transmitted
4: if (New Session) then
5:
S
t
=
P athLength
M inSpeed
6: else
7:
// Shortage of Frames
8:
S
t
=

P athLength
M inSpeed
9:
// with
&lt;&lt; 1
10: end if
11:
V  i
P
p+N
i=p+1
F
i
,
where
F
i
is size of
i-th frame, N =F rameRate × S
t
In light of frame shortage, our video-segmentation algorithm dispatches
into the base-station with need an increment of frames.
This is defined as a fixed fraction of the length of
S
t
in the current
cell (line 7 of Algorithm 1). Requests of such increments may
occur multiple times before a motorist leaves a cell due to congestion
.
A handover might find a moving user either serviced by a base-station
in the realm of the current media-server or under the authority
of a completely new media-server along the motorist's path.
In the first case, the media-server initiates the delivery of the next
video-fragment to the next-base-station encountered. The just departed
base-station can help in determining the appropriate stream
position
p from which the segmentation will have to resume. The
duration of the video-segment is computed anew using the same algorithm
that now takes into consideration the data points from the
new cell. Clearly, the length of the route as well as designated minimum
speed limits may be different from those encountered in the
previous cell.
In the second scenario, a handover may force a user to operate
in an entirely new group of cells supported by a new media-server.
In general, the portion of the "not-yet-seen" stream has to be forwarded
from the previous to the new media-server unless the latter
already maintains its own copy. If we are not interested in reducing
the transmission costs, we can transport the entire video object
to the new media-server using the assumed high-speed link.
The media-server now in charge takes over the session identifier of
the moving user and along with user state data from its previous
location can help coordinate the delivery of the video in the new
cell. To enhance coordination among media-servers in the highest-level
of Figure 1, prefetching could be used [7, 34]. We could de-Algorithm
2
Video Distribution from Media-Server to Base-Station
(s)
1: while (OutstanindRequests) do
2:
if
New Session then
3:
Start session (user's location, video stream, cell ID)
4:
if
Video Stream Not in Storage then
5:
Get Video Stream from corresponding Media-Server
6:
end if
7:
end if
8:
if
(not(Handover)) then
9:
Apply Video Segmentation Algorithm
10:
Send Video-Segment
V to Base-Station
11:
else
12:
if
(new Base-Station within Media-Server realm) then
13:
Apply Video Segmentation Algorithm
14:
Send Segment
V to Base-Station
15:
Send playback position
p to new Base-Station
16:
else
17:
Send Video Stream to next Media-Server
18:
Send playback position
p to next Media-Server
19:
end if
20:
end if
21: end while
ploy prefetching of video-segments to media-servers and/or base-stations
to facilitate playout continuity and minimize the start-up
latencies.
Users moving with similar speed and nearby to the streaming
user can benefit from the already segmented video stream and start
the playout immediately. Caching efficiency is limited by the fact
that only users with similar traveling behavior may use the video
segments. We can overcome this limitation if the starting point of
the video segment at the next cell corresponds to users traveling
at the maximum speed within the current cell. At the same time,
the total size of the segment caters for users that travel at minimum
speed within the next cell, thus remaining longer in the cell's range.
This ensures that successive base stations hold a sufficient amount
of frames to serve users traveling at different speeds.
RATE ADAPTATION
In this section, we propose a rate adaptation scheme whose objective
is to better serve the overall needs of fast-roaming users.
More specifically, we present a mechanism used by base-stations
to control the rate at which they transmit video to each user when
the cell becomes overloaded and the transmission bitrate eventually
needs to be decreased. In light of this reduction, we seek ways
to avoid discontinuities in user playback and cell bandwidth over-utilization
lowering so the probability for a session drop.
While focusing on bitrate management between the second and
last tier of Figure 1, we assume that pertinent video-segment data
is available at a base-station. Upon session initiation, the size
Q
of the mobile device buffer becomes known to the managing base-station
. In general, we assume that a video-object is divided into
frames of constant duration. Frames that belong to the same file
vary in size depending on the encoding rate and the scene content.
A time domain perspective allows us to control the transmission
rate examining the time interval between transmission of successive
frames rather than their respective sizes. If the inter-departure
time corresponds to the rate instructed by the file's frame rate
1
,
1
Typical frame rate values are 25 frames/sec for the PAL color sys-68
Figure 3: Rate Adaptation Modules within a base-station
the transmission bitrate corresponds to the file's encoding bitrate.
Alterations in the inter-departure times result in the inversely proportional
changes in transmission bitrate.
Let
{X
i
k
}
k
1
denote the departure process of the video frames
from the base-station, for the
i-th user. If
i
k
is the departure time
for frame
k, X
i
k
=
i
k+1
i
k
is the inter-departure interval for the
k-th frame. In the absence of buffering capabilities on the mobile
device, the smoothness of
{X
i
k
} is critical for the smoothness of
playback at the user's end. Thus, the following should hold:
P {X
i
k
= T }  1
(3)
where
T is the inter-departure interval specified by the video-object
frame rate. The buffer support that we assume available at the user-end
enables the modification of the
{X
k
} process reflecting modifications
to the actual transmitting bitrate of the base-station.
Video Streaming modules are integral parts of the base-station
configuration and each such module handles the transmission of a
video-stream. Hence, a segment of a video-stream is assigned to
an instance of a Video Streaming module for final delivery to the
user's equipment. A Rate Adaptation (RA) element is assigned to
each user session for the specified video stream. An RA is aware
of the user's buffer size and is responsible for the forwarding of
video frames to the actual Transmitter of the base-station. As information
about the station's load is fed-back by the Transmitter,
the Rate Adaptation element regulates the inter-departure process
of video frames from the station to a user, in a way that preserves
playback continuity. Figure 3 depicts the interaction among these
two elements and the Transmitter at a base-station that serves
k
concurrent sessions for the same video-object.
The operation of the Rate Adaptation element is governed by
periodic time intervals of constant duration, termed Control Cycles.
Operating in the time domain, the module is aware of the exact
number of frames the media player at the user-end will need over a
specific period of time to ensure smooth playback. Let
A denote the
duration of the control cycle. Also, let
Q
A
&gt; 0 be the occupancy
(i.e., number of frames) of the buffer at the beginning of the control
cycle and
N
A
the number of frames that will be reproduced at the
user-end during the control cycle. Since
N
A
frames are requested
tem that corresponds to an inter-departure time of 40 msec, and 30
fps for the NTSC system which corresponds to inter-departure time
of 33.3 msec.
from the media-player and
Q
A
frames are accumulated the rate
adapter needs only transmit
N
A
- Q
A
frames at minimum over the
control cycle.
The video frame rate instructs that a frame be transmitted every
T =
A
N
A
mseconds. Each one of the N
A
-Q
A
frames transmitted
at minimum during the control cycle will depart the base-station at
longer intervals equal to
T =
A
N
A
-Q
A
. The initial inter-departure
time has been spread by a tolerance factor
(  0) where:
A
N
A
- Q
A
= (1 + ) A
N
A
=
Q
A
N
A
- Q
A
(4)
The tolerance factor,
, is a parameter of the control cycle;  may
turn negative only when
Q
A
&gt; N
A
. Thus, a more specific definition
of
would be
=
Q
A
N
A
- Q
A
1
{Q
A
N
A
}
+ 1
{Q
A
&gt;N
A
}
(5)
If the RA element forwards frames at the rate instructed by the
tolerance factor, the transmission bitrate over the control cycle will
be equal to
B/(1+), where B is the encoding bitrate of the video-stream
. A control cycle during which the base-station transmits at
the minimum bitrate instructed by
is called a degraded cycle. A
degraded cycle will lead to zero buffer occupancy at the end of the
control cycle and the tolerance factor for the next control cycle will
be equal to zero. Therefore, no two successive degraded cycles may
occur.
Non-zero buffer occupancy at the beginning of a control cycle
will be present only if the overall transmission rate over the previous
control cycles exceeded
B. This can be achieved if the RA
element forwards frames at a higher rate when the station is un-derutilized
. Let
denote the speed-up factor, the factor by which
the bitrate increases in this case. An expression for the speed-up
factor may be obtained if we consider that the maximum transmission
bitrate will lead to a full user buffer at the end of the control
cycle. If
Q
A
is the buffer occupancy at the beginning of the cycle
, then the station may transmit at maximum
Q - Q
A
frames
over the control cycle. In this case, each frame will be transmitted
every
A
Q
-Q
A
mseconds, with inter-departure interval having been
decreased by
:
A
Q - Q
A
= (1 - ) A
N
A
= 1 N
A
Q - Q
A
(6)
An upgraded cycle will transmit at a rate of
B/(1 - ). The
speed-up factor may turn negative only when the free buffer space
is less than the frames that will be played back during the control
cycle. In this case, the cycle is forced to operate in degraded mode,
so that we can avoid buffer overflow.
It is clear that the
n-th control cycle may forward frames at a rate
in the range of:
B
max{(1 - ), (1 + )}  B
n

B
(1 - )
(7)
The respective inter-departure process,
{X
n
} will be in the range
of:
(1 - )T  {X
n,k
}  max{(1 - )T, (1 + )T }
(8)
The RA element knows at any time the exact number of frames
that have been transmitted to the user, and it also knows the time
that has passed since the session initiation, which corresponds to
the number of frames the playback process has consumed. The difference
between the two values denotes the user buffer occupancy,
69
so no feedback mechanism is required as far as the user buffer occupancy
is concerned. The algorithm followed by each Rate Adaptation
element in the Video Streaming module is outlined in Algorithm
3.
Algorithm 3 Rate Adaptation
element operation
1:
// Executed at the beginning of every control cycle
2:
// for user
i
3:
Q
i
A
= F ramesT ransmit
i
- F ramesP layed
i
4:
= Q
i
A
/(F ramesCycle - Q
i
A
)
5:
= 1 - F ramesCycle/(Q - Q
i
A
)
6:
M inInterval
i
= (1 - ) × T
7: if
&lt; 0 then
8:
M axInterval
i
= M inInterval
i
9: else
10:
M axInterval
i
= (1 + ) × T
11: end if
12:
Interval
i
= M inInterval
i
+
(CellLoadP erc/100) × (M axInterval
i
- M inInterval
i
)
Since the duration of the control cycle is constant, multiple control
cycles may occur during a user's presence in the range of a
single cell, depending on the size of the cell and the user's speed.
We assume that the each cell handover always initiates a new control
cycle.
Algorithm 3 allows for alteration in the transmission bitrate by
providing upper and lower bounds (i.e.,
M inInterval
i
and
M ax­
Interval
i
) to ensure the smoothness of the playout process. The
choice of the actual bitrate within the specified range, at which the
base-station transmits during a control cycle, is ultimately a function
of the station's load at the time. This load is continually estimated
with the help of the Transmitter module. This feedback enables
each Rate Adaptation element to cater for buffer occupancy
increase, taking advantage of low system load periods. At the same
time, by detecting high system load, the Rate Adaptation element
lowers the transmission bandwidth, allowing for more sessions to
be accommodated, while at the same time the playback process is
not distorted.
EVALUATION RESULTS
In order to reproduce and experiment with the behavior of our
proposed architecture and bitrate adaptation scheme, we have setup
a simulation testbed. We have assumed a user trajectory with
duration of 200 seconds. The user traverses numerous cells of different
sizes. Each base-station is equipped with the Video Streaming
module as described earlier. A Control Cycle of 5 seconds is
adopted by all elements. The buffer size at the user-equipment is
assumed to be large enough to store 10 seconds which is readily
met by modern cellular phones and/or PDAs. We designate ten levels
of base-station load with load changing at random times. The
maximum duration of each load state is 30seconds. The
PAL color
system is assumed for the video being transmitted, so the default
inter-departure time for each frame is set at 40 mseconds.
At the beginning of each control cycle, the Rate Adaptation element
applies the proposed Algorithm 3. The testbed initially computes
the tolerance and speed-up factors thus generating the acceptable
inter-departure times range. The actual inter-departure
time for the control cycle is proportional to the station's load at the
time. If the station is lightly loaded, the minimum interdeparture
time (maximum bandwidth) is applied. Conversely when the base-station
is heavily loaded, the frames are forwarded to the transmitter
at the minimum rate instructed by the maximum interdeparture
time. For intermediate load levels an appropriate value from the
inter-departure times range is selected according to Algorithm 3 in
a uniform fashion.
Figure 4 shows the evolution of the base stations' load during the
user's trajectory, over all cells that the individual travels in. Having
defined load of value 5 as "normal" load, the base-station load
remains relatively high through the user trajectory with a few very
short periods of low load.
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
50
100
150
200
Load
Time
Base station load
Figure 4: Base-station load during user trajectory
Figure 5 shows the applied transmission bitrate, along with the
minimum and maximum bitrates allowed for every control cycle.
The
y-axis represents the percentage of the actual transmission bitrate
to the video encoding bitrate. The bitrate is inversely proportional
to the inter-departure times which are illustrated in figure 6.
If we compare the curves of Figures 5 and 4, we can easily establish
that the actual bitrate applied is a function of the base-station
load and the calculated allowed bitrate range. At times of high
load, the applied bitrate is closer to the minimum acceptable bitrate
and conversely at times of light load, the applied bitrate is closer
to the maximum acceptable bitrate. Figure 6 shows that the interdeparture
times are indeed proportional to the base-station load.
0
50
100
150
200
0
50
100
150
200
Transmission bitrate (%)
Time
Transmission bitrate
Figure 5: Allowed transmission bitrate limits and applied
transmission bitrate.
70
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
0
50
100
150
200
Interdeparture time
Time
Frame interdeparture time
Figure 6: Applied interdeparture interval.
We show the user buffer occupancy throughout the trajectory in
Figure 7. The buffer does not starve at any time suggesting the
usefulness of our proposed scheme. The occupancy increases at
times where the base station load falls below the normal load.
Under overall higher-than-normal base-station load settings, our
tests show that the playback continuity is preserved by only taking
advantage of relatively small periods of station underutilization to
increase the transmission bitrate. The range of the acceptable transmission
rate includes the bandwidth already guaranteed by the network
upon session acceptance at all times. Therefore, the network
was never forced to transmit at a higher-than-agreed bitrate. At
times of station over-utilization, the decreased transmission bitrate
allows for more calls to be accommodated significantly decreasing
the probability of session drop.
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
50
100
150
200
Occupancy
Time
Occupancy
Figure 7: User buffer occupancy.
A system that adopts no rate adaptation scheme would constantly
require a transmission bitrate equal to the 100% of the video encoding
bitrate throughout the session. Although the bitrate of real-time
video streaming sessions is guaranteed by the
UMTS specifications
, at near-capacity situations, the network would have to
either drop a session or be forced to transmit with lower bitrate.
The former case is clearly undesirable and the latter generates jitter
effects for the end-user. This would happen even if the station
gets overloaded only for a period of time equal to the proposed
scheme's control cycle duration. Discontinuities in the playback
process may be observed at a system adopting the proposed rate
adaptation scheme as well, however only in the case when the base-station
is constantly load saturated, thus not allowing for any upgraded
cycles to take place.
RELATED WORK
There has been a large amount of reported work in related areas
that include caching for video systems, management of moving objects
, and rate adaptation for streaming systems on wired networks.
Data caching and mirroring has been proposed as a way to help
the scalability of video delivery systems [32]. By placing content
closer to the consuming clients not only network costs can be curtailed
but also the load of streaming servers can be reduced. Various
aspects of the use of proxy servers for video objects has been examined
in [14, 26, 23, 10]. In [14], the segmentation and caching
of streaming objects is proposed and the merging of requests that
are temporally related is investigated. This merging idea has been
used in [8, 18, 11] to save bandwidth in light of requests for the
same video object that arrive closely in time.
The partial caching of two successive intervals of a video stream
is proposed in [10] as a way to speed-up the serving of follow-up
requests for the the same video object. In [26], the caching of initial
frames of a video object is used in a proxy-setting to reduce startup
latency. In the same direction, the storage of the bursty parts of a
video-stream in a proxy is advocated in [34]; the remaining parts of
the video are directly retrieved from the source helping significantly
reduce peak bandwidth requirements in the backbone. A caching
mechanism for layered encoded multimedia streams is suggested in
[23]; the objective of the technique is to selectively deliver stream
quality by differentiating on the client network connection. Stream
quality differentiation is also addressed in [24], in conjuction with
a seamless handoff mechanism for mobile users.
A formal spatiotemporal framework for modeling moving objects
and a query language is discussed in [27]. Efficient techniques
for indexing moving objects in one and two dimensions are
proposed in [12] while in [5] the trade-offs for indexing schemes to
answer interval, rectangle, approximate nearest-neighbor, approximate
farthest-neighbor and convex-hull queries are examined. The
indexing of current and anticipated positions of moving objects in
the context of location based services is examined in [25]. Much
work has been also reported in data broadcast and dissemination
over wireless networks during the last decade [4, 22, 33, 19, 6].
Rate adaptation for wired streaming systems has been exten-sively
studied in [28, 20, 31, 29, 16, 17]. These studies assume
an adaptable video encoding system that changes the encoding parameters
on the fly based on feedback information about the channel
state. The notion of cycle-based operation is used in [13] with
cycles being successively alternating between good and bad cycles.
Our work differs in that it does not require a prefetching period so
that an initial occupancy is built up in the buffer before the playback
begins. Also, our algorithm functions in a graceful manner when
the base-station load does not allow for aggressive use of channel
resources.
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we address the problem of efficient video delivery
in real-time to high-speed users roaming a
3G network. We propose
a network of media servers handling the content distribution
on top of the mobile environment that closely cooperates with the
71
base-stations and user-equipment for the provision of continuous
video playout. We segment video streams into variable-sized parts
according to the user's speed and traversal path through different
cells. In this manner, we minimize the transmission costs between
media-servers and base-stations as well as the start-up latency experienced
by users during handover. We adopt the use of Video
Streaming modules along with their Rate Adaptation elements with
the infrastructure of base-stations to ensure smoothness of the playout
process. Preliminary experimentation results through simulation
show that the proposed scheme rapidly adapts to changes in
load conditions at base-stations, thus minimizing the probability of
buffer starvation or even session drops. The low complexity of the
proposed mechanism makes it suitable for real-time applications.
REFERENCES
[1] 3rd Generation Partnership Project. Universal Mobile
Telecommunication System/IMT­2000 Spectrum. Technical
Report 6, UMTS Forum, 1998.
[2] 3rd Generation Partnership Project. Stage 2 Functional Specification
of Location Services in URAN. Technical Report (3G TR 25.923
version 1.4.0), UMTS Forum, 1999. Technical Specification
Group(TSG) RAN, Working Group 2 (WG2).
[3] 3rd Generation Partnership Project. Transparent End-to-End Packet
Switched Streaming Service (PSS) General Description (Release 4).
Technical Report 3GPP-TS-26.233-V4.0.0, UMTS Forum, 2000.
Technical Specification Group Services and System Aspects.
[4] S. Acharya, M.J. Franklin, and S. B. Zdonik. Balancing Push and
Pull for Data Broadcast. In Proceedimgs of SIGMOD 1997, Tucson,
AZ, May 1997.
[5] P.K. Agarwal, L. Arge, J. Erickson, and H. Yu. Efficient Tradeoff
Schemes in Data Structures for Querying Moving Objects. In 12th
Annual European Symposium on Algorithms (ESA), pages 4­15,
Bergen, Norway, September 2004.
[6] D. Aksoy, M. Altinel, R. Bose, U. Cetintemel, M. Franklin, J. Wang,
and S. Zdonik. Research in Data Broadcast and Dissemination. In
Proceedings of International Conf. on Advanced Multimedia Content
Processing (AMCP), Osaka, Japan, November 1998.
[7] P. Cao, E. W. Felten, A. R. Karlin, and K. Li. A Study of Integrated
Prefetching and Caching Strategies. In Proceedings of ACM
SIGMETRICS Conf., pages 188­197, Ottawa, Canada, May 1995.
[8] S. Chan and F. Tobagi. Caching schemes for distributed video
services. In Proceedings of the 1999 IEEE International Conference
on Communications (ICC'99), Vancouver, Canada, June 1999.
[9] S. Choi and K. G. Shin. Predictive and Adaptive Bandwidth
Reservation for Hand-Offs in QoS-Sensitive Cellular Networks. In
Proceedings of ACM­SIGCOMM, pages 155­166, 1998.
[10] A. Dan and D. Sitaram. A Generalized Interval Caching Policy for
Mixed Interactive and Long Video Environments. In Proceedings of
IST/SPIE Multimedia Computing and Networking Conference, San
Jose, CA, January 1996.
[11] A. Dan, D. Sitaram, and P. Shahabuddin. Dynamic Batching Policies
for an On-demand Video Server. Multimedia Systems, 4(3):112­121,
1996.
[12] G. Kollios and D. Gunopulos and V.J. Tsotras. On Indexing Mobile
Objects . In Proceedimgs of 1999 ACM SIGACT-SIGMOD-SIGART
Symposium on Principles of Database Systems (PODS), Philadephia,
PA, 1999.
[13] M. Hassan, L. Atzori, and M. Krunz. Video Transport over Wireless
Channels: A Cycle-based Approach for Rate Control. In Proceedings
of the ACM Multimedia 2004 Conference. ACM Press, October 2004.
[14] M. Hofmann, E. Ng, K. Guo, S. Paul, and H. Zhang. Caching
Techniques for Streaming Multimedia over the Internet. Technical
report, Bell Laboratories, April 1999. BL011345-990409-04TM.
[15] H. Holma and A. Toskala. WCDMA for UMTS Radio Access for
Third Generation Mobile Communications. John Wiley & Sons Inc.,
New York, NY, 2nd edition, 2002.
[16] C.-Y. Hsu, A. Ortega, and A.R. Reibman. Joint Selection of Source
and Channel Rate for VBR Video Transmission Under ATM Policing
Constraints. IEEE Journal of Selected Areas in Communications,
15(6):1016­1028, 1997.
[17] P.-C. Hu, Z-L. Zhang, and M. Kaveh. Channel Condition ARQ Rate
Control for Real-time Wireless Video Under Buffer Constraints. In
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conf. on Image Processing,
Vancouver BC, Canada, September 2000.
[18] K.A. Hua, Y. Cai, and S. Sheu. Patching: a Multicast Technique for
True Video-on-demand Services. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM
International Conference on Multimedia, pages 191­200. ACM
Press, 1998.
[19] T. Imielinski, S. Viswanathan, and B. R. Badrinath. Data on Air:
Organization and Access. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and
Data Engineering, (3):353­372, 1997.
[20] H.-J. Lee, T. Chiang, and Y.-Q. Zhang. Scalable Rate Control for
MPEG-4 Video. IEEE Transactions On Circuits and Systems for
Video Technology, 10(9):878­894, September 2000.
[21] S.-J. Lee, W.-Y. Ma, and B. Shen. An Interactive Video Delivery and
Caching System Using Video Summarization. Computer
Communications, 25(4):424­435, March 2002.
[22] E. Pitoura and P.K. Chrysanthis. Multiversion Data Broadcast. IEEE
Transactions on Computers, 51(10):1224­1230, 2002.
[23] R. Rejaie, H. Yu, M. Handley, and D. Estrin. Multimedia Proxy
Caching Mechanism for Quality Adaptive Streaming Applications in
the Internet. In Proceedings of INFOCOM(2), pages 980­989, 2000.
[24] S. Roy and B. Shen abd V. Sundaram. Application Level Handoff
Support for Mobile Media Transcoding Sessions. In 12th
International Workshop on Network and Operating System Support
for Digital Audio and Video, Miami, FL, 2002.
[25] S. Saltenis and C.S. Jensen. Indexing of Moving Objects for
Location-Based Services. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE), pages 463­472, 2002.
[26] S. Sen, J. Rexford, and D. F. Towsley. Proxy Prefix Caching for
Multimedia Streams. In Proceedings of INFOCOM(3), pages
1310­1319, New York, NY, 1999.
[27] A.P. Sistla, O. Wolfson, S. Chamberlain, and S. Dao. Modeling and
Querying Moving Objects. In Proceedings of the 13th IEEE
International Conf. on Data Engineering, Birmingham, UK, April
1997.
[28] H. Song and C.-C.-J. Kuo. Rate control for Low Bit Rate Video via
Variable Encoding Frame Rates. IEEE Transactions On Circuits and
Systems for Video Technology, 11(4):512­521, April 2001.
[29] W. Tawbi, F. Horn, E. Horlait, and J.-B. Stefani. Video Compression
Standards and Quality of Service. The Computer Journal,
36(1):43­54, 1993.
[30] Texas Instruments. Mobile Connectivity: Assisted-GPS.
http://focus.ti.com/general/docs/wtbu, 2004.
[31] T. Wiegand, M. Lightstone, T. Campbell, D. Mukherjee, and
S. Mitra. Rate-Distortion Optimized Mode Selection for Very Low
Bit Rate Video Coding and the Emerging H.263 Standard. URL:
citeseer.ist.psu.edu/wiegand95ratedistortion.html, 1999.
[32] D. Wu, Y.T. Hou, W. Zhu, Y.-Q. Zhang, and J.M. Peha. Streaming
Video over the Internet: Approaches and Directions. IEEE
Transactions on Circuits and Systems for video Technology,
11(1):1­20, February 2001.
[33] X. Yang and A. Bouguettaya. Broadcast-Based Data Access in
Wireless Environments. In Proceedings of the EDBT International
Conference, Prague, Czech Republic, 2002.
[34] Z.-L. Zhang, Y. Wang, D.H.C. Du, and D. Shu. Video staging: a
proxy-server-based approach to end-to-end video delivery over
wide-area networks. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking,
8(4):429­442, 2000.
72

