A Survey of Collaborative Information Seeking Practices of Academic Researchers
ABSTRACT
Information seeking and management practices are an 
integral aspect of people's daily work. However, we still 
have little understanding of collaboration in the 
information seeking process. Through a survey of 
collaborative information seeking practices of academic 
researchers, we found that researchers reported that (1) the 
lack of expertise is the primary reason that they collaborate 
when seeking information; (2) traditional methods, 
including face-to-face, phone, and email are the preferred 
communication mediums for collaboration; and (3) 
collaborative information seeking activities are usually 
successful and more useful than individually seeking 
information. These results begin to highlight the important 
role that collaborative information seeking plays in daily 
work.
Categories and Subject Descriptors:
H.3.3
Information search and retrieval
General Terms:
Human Factors

INTRODUCTION
Information seeking and management practices are an 
integral aspect of people's daily work. In organizational 
work, information is vital for making decisions and 
coordinating activities. Therefore, organizations have 
developed a wide variety of processes and technologies to 
support their workers' information seeking activities. Much 
of this support has been for the individual  information
seeker; in most organizations, information seeking has been 
traditionally viewed as an individual activity [1, 2].  
Yet, collaboration is becoming an increasingly important 
component of work in organizations. Multidisciplinary 
teams are a common feature of modern organizations [3, 
4]. To successfully accomplish their work, team members 
must collaborate with each other efficiently and effectively. 
One important aspect of the team's work is seeking 
information [5]. Yet, we have little understanding of 
collaborative information seeking practices [6, 7]. 
Therefore, to help team members work together effectively 
and to design information systems that support their work, 
we must understand the collaborative information seeking 
practices of team members. 
To examine collaborative information seeking (CIS) 
practices, we conducted a survey of academic researchers 
in a small technology-focused research university. 
Researchers have traditionally collaborated with each other 
on research projects because of the often cross-disciplinary 
nature of the work. This collaboration has increased in 
recent years as information and communication 
technologies have improved. Although the survey asked a 
variety of questions, in this paper, we focus on three 
particular areas of interest: 
·  What triggers are most likely to lead to CIS activities? 
·  When engaging in CIS, what media or channel of
communication is most likely used to collaborate?
·  How successful are these CIS activities?  
In a previous study, we identified three triggers that cause 
team members to collaborate when seeking information. 
These triggers are (1) lack of expertise (2) complex 
information need and (3) information not easily accessible 
[8]. In this study, we were interested in identifying which 
of these triggers researchers reported to be the most 
important reason for them to collaborate when seeking 
information. We also wanted to identify what were the 
primary mechanisms of collaboration (e.g., e-mail, face-to-face
, etc.). We were also interested in determining the
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. 
GROUP'05, November 6­9, 2005, Sanibel Island, Florida, USA. 
Copyright 2005 ACM 1-59593-223-2/05/0011...$5.00.
85
degree to which researchers found collaborative 
information seeking to be successful, particularly in 
comparison to individual information seeking.
COLLABORATIVE INFORMATION SEEKING
Although there is limited research on collaborative 
information seeking, researchers are beginning to explore 
this phenomena in various domains [9]. 
In a study of two design teams, Poltrock et al [10] found 
that each team had different communication and 
information seeking practices. Interestingly, they did not 
examine an individual's role in the information seeking 
process but rather how team members actively worked 
together to identify information needs. They argue that an 
understanding of collaborative information retrieval will 
allow for the informed design of technologies meant to 
support such work, and will also allow teams to work more 
effectively with these sources of information. In a study of 
information behavior in a hierarchical work environment ­ 
a military command and control environment ­ 
Sonnenwald and Pierce [11] described information seeking 
as a dynamic activity in which "individuals must work 
together to seek, synthesize and disseminate information." 
They examined how team members maintained awareness 
of each other's information activities and how this 
awareness influenced their information sharing with each 
other. Finally, in a study of collaborative information 
seeking in the medical domain, Reddy and Dourish [12] 
argue that work rhythms play a role in healthcare 
providers' collaborative information seeking practices.  
Although a few studies have examined collaborative 
information seeking in small group settings through 
ethnographic field studies, there have been, to the best of 
our knowledge, no studies that have used surveys to gather 
data on CIS from a larger population sample.

METHODS
Seventy researchers at a small a small technology-focused 
research university participated in this study. The majority 
were faculty researchers and a small percentage were 
graduate research assistants. Most participants were from 
science and technology disciplines.
3.2  Materials and Procedures
One-hundred and fifty potential participants were emailed a 
request to participate, which included an email link to an 
online survey. The response rate was 47%.  
The survey included the following items: 
1.  What causes you to work together when looking for
information?
(a)  The information needed is complex.
(b)  The information needed requires a different
expertise.
(c)  The information is not immediately accessible.
2.  What medium are you most likely to use when
collaborating with your teammates to look for 
information?
(a) Electronic forum; (b) Email; (c) Face-to-face;  
(d) Fax; (e) Instant message; (f) Telephone; (f) Web 
conferencing
3.  When collaborating with teammates to look for
information, we usually find the information for which 
the team is searching.
4.  Participating in collaborative information seeking is
easier than individual information seeking.
5.  Participating in collaborative information seeking leads
to more relevant information being found than when 
individually seeking information.
6.  Participating in collaborative information seeking leads
to information being found more quickly than when 
individually seeking information.
Participants responded to each phrase under item 1 and to 
items 3 ­ 6 on a scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 
10 (strongly agree) and to item 2 on a scale ranging from 1 
(not at all likely) to 10 (very likely). The survey also 
included free-text opportunities for the respondents to 
provide more information about their answers, if they 
chose to do so.

RESULTS & DISCUSSION
In order to determine the triggers that are most likely to 
lead to collaborative information seeking, the responses to 
questionnaire items 1a, 1b, and 1c where considered. A 
one-way within-subjects analyses of variance (ANOVA) 
was computed with trigger serving as the independent 
variable with three levels (complexity, expertise, and 
accessibility) and rating as the dependent variable. This 
ANOVA was statistically significant F(2, 132) = 16.878 
and  p &lt; .001. Bonferroni's post hoc tests indicated that 
expertise was rated significantly higher (M = 8.17) than 
both complexity (M = 6.80) and accessibility (M = 6.73), 
while complexity did not significantly differ from 
accessibility.  
The findings indicate that academic researchers will most 
often collaborate because they find the information requires 
a different expertise than their own. Many academic 
research projects are multidisciplinary in nature and require 
particular knowledge that a researcher may not have. As 
one researcher stated, "The basic reason is that frequently a 
wide range of expertise is needed and no one person can 
possibly have all the skills needed to be successful."
86
Although the complexity of the information need and 
accessibility of information could lead to collaboration, they 
are not viewed as strongly as expertise. In regards to 
information accessibility, one researcher points out, 
"information is usually accessible; however, someone else 
will likely understand it better." For this researcher the 
difficulty was not in accessing the information but rather in 
understanding its relevance which may require different 
expertise. 
During the CIS process, different researchers bring their own 
particular expertise and perspective to the team. When a 
researcher seeks information outside her domain of expertise, 
she will often turn to another researcher for help. These 
different expertises play an important role in the 
collaborative information seeking activities of the research 
team.
4.2  Communication Mediums for CIS 
Activities
In order to examine the relationship between communication 
mediums, and to reduce the number of variables for 
subsequent analysis, a principal component factor analyses 
with a Varimax rotation was computed on the responses to 
questionnaire item 2. A four factor solution was selected 
because all Eigen values were above 1, and a logical 
grouping of sources emerged. We labeled the first factor 
"traditional", and it included: email, face-to-face, and 
telephone. We labeled the second factor "web" and it 
included: instant messenger, web conferencing, and web 
sites. The third and fourth factor each included one item, 
"electronic forum" and "fax", and were, thus labeled 
accordingly. Factor scores were created by using the mean of 
all the items that loaded on a given factor, and these factor 
scores were used in subsequent analyses. 
In order to identify the media that are most likely used for 
collaborate information seeking, a one-way within-subjects 
analyses of variance (ANOVA) was computed with medium 
factor scores serving as the independent variable with four 
levels (traditional, web, electronic forum and fax) and rating 
as the dependent variable. This ANOVA was statistically 
significant as F(3, 195) = 84.709 and p &lt; .001. Bonferroni's 
post hoc tests indicated that traditional media (M= 8.10) 
significantly outscored all other types; both web media 
(M=3.64) and electronic forum (M=4.58) significantly 
outscored fax (M=2.70) but did not significantly differ one 
from the other.  
Researchers preferred traditional media for their 
communication. Within this category, we included e-mail. 
Although e-mail may not seem to fit in the same category as 
face-to-face and telephone, it has become such a ubiquitous 
communication medium that respondents viewed it as being 
similar to face-to-face and the telephone. Furthermore, email 
has been in existence much longer than other types of 
electronic mediums such as web conferences. People are
more comfortable and experienced with email and personal 
conversations, whether these conversations are in person or 
on the phone. The other media were not as strongly 
embraced. For instance, we had anticipated that web-based 
media such as web-conferencing and instant messaging 
would have higher rating than it did. One possible 
explanation is "newness" of the technology. For instance, 
instant messenger tools are still relatively new and have not 
permeated to all groups and ages. Furthermore, some of the 
web-based media take time to set-up. Web conferences and 
web sites require time and effort unlike picking up the phone 
to talk to someone. Interestingly, although not included as a 
medium to rate, some participants added campus mail and 
"snail mail" as a medium for communication. 
Whether collaborators are physically co-located or 
geographically dispersed, communication is an essential 
component of collaborative information seeking. The 
researchers orient towards the mediums that are familiar to 
them.
4.3  Success of Collaborative Information 
Seeking Activities
In order to address the question of whether collaborations are 
successful when engaging in CIS, a dichotomous variable 
was created for each success item (3 ­ 6), whereby a rating 
of 0 to 5 was considered "disagree", and a rating of 6 to 10 
was considered "agree". We initially used a 10- point scale in 
order to be consistent with the rest of the survey questions. 
We then made the decision to reduce the scale to a 
dichotomous variable in order to evaluate this question with 
a test of statistical significance. Using this dichotomous 
variable, a chi-square analysis was performed on the 
frequencies for each success item. The results of these 
analyses as well as the mean rating for each item, with mean 
representing degree of agreement from 1 to 10 (10 
representing "strongly agree"), is displayed in Table 1.

Table 1. Means and Chi-Square for Success Factors
Agreement
Success
Factor Mean
Agree Disagree
Chi-Square
Usually find 
info
8.0152 64
2
X
2
=
58.242, p &lt;
.001
Easier than 
individual info 
seeking 7.1061
50
16
X
2
=
17.515, p &lt;
.001
Find more 
relevant info 
than individual 
info seeking
7.3788
55
11
X
2
=
29.333, p &lt;
.001
Quicker than 
individual info 
seeking 6.9394
48
10
X
2
=
24.897, p &lt;
.001
87
Success is often subjective and difficult to define, 
particularly with ill-defined tasks such as information 
seeking. Therefore, we asked four questions related to 
success to gain a better understanding of this important 
area. Most researchers agreed that when collaborating with 
colleagues to look for information, they usually found the 
needed information. They also thought that collaboratively 
seeking information was easier and lead to more relevant 
information than individually seeking information.  
Collaborative information seeking allows researchers to 
rely on other colleagues for help and guidance; therefore, 
allowing them to focus on their own area of expertise. This 
could be one possible reason why researchers strongly 
believe that CIS allows them to quickly find more relevant 
information when compared to individual information 
seeking. At the same time, one researcher provided a note 
of caution stating that the success "depends on your team 
of seekers." As in many collaborative activities, the success 
depends on how well the team of information seekers can 
work together when looking for information.
CONCLUSIONS
Collaborative information seeking is an important aspect of 
the work done by teams. The findings presented here raise 
issues that are important to consider when conceptualizing 
collaborative information seeking and how to best support 
this activity. 
One important issue is how to support information seeking 
in geographically dispersed teams. Physical co-located 
team members can have face-to-face interaction. However, 
for "virtual" teams technical support becomes even more 
important because they do not have the advantages of the 
face-to-face interaction. This technical support could 
include features that allow individuals to exchange ideas, 
or share searches while collaboratively searching for 
information [9]. 
For the next stages of this study, we plan on conducting a 
field study of academic research teams to better understand 
the actual interaction of team members during the 
collaborative information seeking process.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank the anonymous participants who 
answered the survey. This research was supported in part 
by Missouri Research Board grant 1734.

REFERENCES
1.  Ellis, D. (1989). A behavioral model for information
retrieval system design. Journal of Information Science, 15: 
p. 237-247.
2.  Ellis, D. and M. Haugan. (1997) Modeling the Information
Seeking Patterns of Engineers and Research Scientists in an 
Industrial Environment. The Journal of Documentation. 
53(4): p. 384-403.
3.  Hackman, R. ed. (1990) Groups that Work (and Those That
Don't): Creating Conditions for Effective Teamwork. Jossey-Bass
Publications: San Francisco.
4.  Mankin, D., S. Cohen, and T. Bikson. (1996). Teams and
Technology. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
5.  Bruce, H., et al. (2002). A comparison of the collaborative
information retrieval (CIR) behaviors of two design teams. in 
Information Seeking In Context: The Fourth International 
Conference on Information Needs, Seeking and Use in 
Different Contexts. Lisbon, Portugal.
6.  Sonnenwald, D.H. and L.A. Lievrouw. (1996). Collaboration
during the Design Process: A Case Study of Communication, 
Information Behavior, and Project Performance. in Proc Int 
Conf on Research in Information Needs, Seeking, and Use in 
Different Contexts. Tampere, Finland: London: Taylor 
Graham.
7.  Haythornthwaite, C., B. Wellman, and M. Mantei. (1995).
Work Relationships and Media Use: A Social Network 
Analysis. Group Decision and Negotiation. 4(3): p. 193-211.
8.  Reddy, M. (In submission) Collaborative Information
Seeking: Supporting the work of multi-disciplinary patient 
care teams. Journal of American Medical Informatics 
Association (JAMIA).
9.  Twidale, M. and D.M. Nichols. (1998). Designing Interfaces
to Support Collaboration in Information Retrieval. 
Interacting with Computers. 10(2): p. 177-193.
10.  Poltrock, S., et al. (2003). Information Seeking and Sharing
in Design Teams. in Proceedings of the 2003 International 
ACM SIGGROUP Conference on Supporting Group Work.
11.  Sonnenwald, D.H. and L.G. Pierce. (2000). Information
behavior in dynamic group work contexts: interwoven 
situational awareness, dense social networks and contested 
collaboration in command and control. Information 
Processing and Management.36: p. 461-479.
12.  Reddy, M. and P. Dourish. (2002). A Finger on the Pulse:
Temporal Rhythms and Information Seeking in Medical 
Care. In Proc. of ACM Conf. on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work (CSCW'02). New Orleans, LA: New 
York: ACM. p. 344-353.
88
