Real-world Oriented Information Sharing Using Social Networks
ABSTRACT
While users disseminate various information in the open and
widely distributed environment of the Semantic Web, determination
of who shares access to particular information is at
the center of looming privacy concerns. We propose a real-world
-oriented information sharing system that uses social
networks. The system automatically obtains users' social
relationships by mining various external sources. It also enables
users to analyze their social networks to provide awareness
of the information dissemination process. Users can determine
who has access to particular information based on
the social relationships and network analysis.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.5.3 [Information Interfaces AND Presentation]:
Group and Organizational Interfaces--collaborative computing
, computer-supported cooperative work, web-based interaction
General Terms
Design, Human Factors

INTRODUCTION
With the current development of tools and sites that enable
users to create Web content, users have become able to
easily disseminate various information. For example, users
create Weblogs, which are diary-like sites that include various
public and private information. Furthermore, the past
year has witnessed the emergence of social networking sites
that allow users to maintain an online network of friends
or associates for social or business purposes. Therein, data
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
GROUP'05, November 6-9, 2005, Sanibel Island, Florida, USA.
Copyright 2005 ACM 1-59593-223-2/05/0011 ...
$
5.00.
related to millions of people and their relationships are publicly
available on the Web.
Although these tools and sites enable users to easily disseminate
information on the Web, users sometimes have difficulty
in sharing information with the right people and frequently
have privacy concerns because it is difficult to determine
who has access to particular information on such
applications. Some tools and applications provide control
over information access. For example, Friendster, a huge
social networking site, offers several levels of control from
"public information" to "only for friends". However, it provides
only limited support for access control.
An appropriate information sharing system that enables
all users to control the dissemination of their information
is needed to use tools and sites such as Weblog, Wiki, and
social networking services fully as an infrastructure of disseminating
and sharing information. In the absence of such
a system, a user would feel unsafe and would therefore be
discouraged from disseminating information.
How can we realize such an information sharing system
on the Web? One clue exists in the information sharing
processes of the real world. Information availability is often
closely guarded and shared only with the people of one's
social relationships. Confidential project documents which
have limited distribution within a division of company, might
be made accessible to other colleagues who are concerned
with the project. Private family photographs might be shared
not only with relatives, but also with close friends. A professor
might access a private research report of her student.
We find that social relationships play an important role in
the process of disseminating and receiving information. This
paper presents a real-world oriented information sharing system
using social networks. It enables users to control the
information dissemination process within social networks.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: section
2 describes the proposed information sharing system
using social networks. In section 3, we describe the application
of our system. Finally, we conclude this paper in
section 4.
INFORMATION SHARING USING SOCIAL NETWORKS
Figure 1 depicts the architecture of the proposed information
sharing system. The system functions as a "plug-in"
for applications so that external applications enable users
to leverage social networks to manage their information dis-81
Social network analysis
Applications for Information Sharing
e.g. Weblog, Wiki, CMS, SNS etc
Contents
Data
Access control List Editor
Access control
Data (XACML)
Social networks extraction
Web
Web pages,
SNS, FOAF, etc
Email
Sensors
Social networks Editor
Social networks
Data (FOAF)
Edit social networks
Edit access control list
Contents data
Access to contents
Access permission
User data
Figure 1: Architecture of the proposed information
sharing system
Birthplace
: Kagawa, Japan
Workplace
: AIST
Job
: CS researcher
Research topics
: Web
University
: Tokyo univ.
Interest
: Sumo wrestling
...
person
Properties
Birthplace
: Los Angels, US
Workplace
: Washington Univ.
Job
: CS researcher
Research topics
: Web
University
: UC California
Interest
: Sumo wrestling
...
person
Properties
Birthplace
: Kagawa, Japan
Workplace
: AIST
Job
: CS researcher
Research topics
: Web
University
: Tokyo univ.
Interest
: Sumo wrestling
...
person
Properties
Birthplace
: Los Angels, US
Workplace
: Washington Univ.
Job
: CS researcher
Research topics
: Web
University
: UC California
Interest
: Sumo wrestling
...
person
Properties
person
person
Event
Participate
Common
Event-participation relationship
Common property relationship
Figure 2: Two kinds of relationships
semination. A user can attach an access control list to his
content using his social network when creating content on
an application. Then, when the application receives a request
to access the content, it determines whether to grant
the request based on the access control list.
Because users determine the access control to information
based on the social network, the system requires social
network data. The system obtains users' social networks automatically
by mining various external sources such as Web,
emails, and sensor information; subsequently, it maintains a
database of the social network information. Users can adjust
the network if necessary.
The system enables users to analyze their social network
to provide awareness of the information dissemination process
within the social network. Using social relationships
and the results of social network analyses, users can decide
who can access their information.
Currently, the proposed system is applied to an academic
society because researchers have various social relationships
(e.g., from a student to a professor, from a company to a university
) through their activities such as meetings, projects,
and conferences. Importantly, they often need to share various
information such as papers, ideas, reports, and schedules
. Sometimes, such information includes private or confidential
information that ought only to be shared with appropriate
people. In addition, researchers have an interest
in managing the information availability of their social relationships
. The information of social relationships of an
academic society, in particular computer science, is easily
available online to a great degree. Such information is important
to obtain social networks automatically.
Hereafter, we explain in detail how social networks are
modeled, extracted and analyzed.
Then we explain how
users can decide to control information access using social
networks.
2.1
Representation of Social Relationships
With the variety of social relationships that exist in the
real world, a salient problem has surfaced: integration and
consolidation on a semantic basis. The representation of
social relationships must be sufficiently fine-grained that we
can capture all details from individual sources of information
in a way that these can be recombined later and taken as
evidence of a certain relationship.
Several representations of social relationships exist. For
example, social network sites often simplify the relationship
as "friend" or "acquaintance". In the Friend of a Friend
(FOAF) [1] vocabulary, which is one of the Semantic Web's
largest and most popular ontologies for describing people
and whom they know, many kinds of relationships between
people are deliberately simplified as "knows" relations. A
rich ontological consideration of social relationships is needed
for characterization and analysis of individual social networks
.
We define two kinds of social relationship (Fig. 2) [7].
The first basic structure of social relationship is a person's
participation in an event. Social relationships come into existence
through events involving two or more individuals.
Such events might not require personal contact, but they
must involve social interaction. From this event, social relationships
begin a lifecycle of their own, during which the
characteristics of the relationship might change through interaction
or the lack thereof. An event is classified as perdu-rant
in the DOLCE ontology [6], which is a popular ontology.
For example, an event might be a meeting, a conference, a
baseball game, a walk, etc. Assume that person
A and person
B participate in Event X. In that situation, we note
that
A and B share an event co-participation relationship
under event
X.
A social relationship might have various social roles asso-ciated
with it. For example, a student-professor relationship
within a university setting includes an individual playing the
role of a professor; another individual plays the role of a student
. If
A and B take the same role to Event X, they are in
a same role relationship under event
X (e.g., students at a
class, colleagues in a workspace). If
A cannot take over B's
role or vice versa,
A and B are in a role-sharing relationship
(e.g., a professor and students, a project leader and staff).
Another kind of social relationship is called a common
property relationship. Sharing the same property value generates
a common property relationship between people. For
example, person
A and person B have a common working
place, common interests, and common experiences. Consequently
, they are in a common property relationship with
regard to those common properties.
2.2
Extraction of Social Networks
If two persons are in either an event co-participation relationship
or a common property relationship, they often
communicate. The communication media can be diverse:
82
Figure 3: Editor for social relationships
Figure 4: Editor for analyzing social networks and
assigning an access control list to content
face-to-face conversation, telephone call, email, chat, online
communication on Weblogs, and so on. If we wish to discover
the social relationship by observation, we must estimate
relationships from superficial communication. The
emerging field of social network mining provides methods
for discovering social interactions and networks from legacy
sources such as web pages, databases, mailing lists, and personal
emails.
Currently, we use three kinds of information sources to obtain
social relationships using mining techniques. From the
Web, we extract social networks using a search engine and
the co-occurrence of two persons' names on the Web. Consequently
, we can determine the following relationships among
researchers: Coauthor, Same affiliation, Same project, Same
event (participants of the same conference, workshop, etc.)
[8]. Coauthor and Same event correspond to an event co-participation
relationship. Same affiliation and same project
correspond to a common property relationship. We are also
using other sources such as email and sensors (we are developing
a device that detects users within social spaces such
as parties and conferences) to obtain social relationships.
Necessarily, the quality of information obtained by mining
is expected to be inferior to that of manually authored profiles
. We can reuse those data if a user has already declared
his relationships in FOAF or profiles of social networking
services. Although users might find it difficult and demanding
to record social relations, it would be beneficial to ask
users to provide information to obtain social relationships.
In addition to the relationship type, another factor of the
social relationship is tie strength. Tie strength itself is a
complex construct of several characteristics of social relations
. It is definable as affective, frequency, trust, comple-mentarity
, etc. No consensus for defining and measuring
them exists, which means that people use different elicita-tion
methods when it comes to determining tie strength.
For example, Orkut, a huge social networking service, allows
description of the strength of friendship relations on a
five-point scale from "haven't met" to "best friend", whereas
other sites might choose other scales or terms.
In our system, we use trust as a parameter of tie strength.
Trust has several very specific definitions. In [4], Golbeck
describes trust as credibility or reliability in a human sense:
"how much credence should I give to what this person speaks
about" and "based on what my friends say, how much should
I trust this new person?" In the context of information sharing
, trust can be regarded as reliability regarding "how a
person will handle my information". Users can give trust
directly in a numerical value to a person in his relation.
Alternatively, trust is obtainable automatically as authori-tativeness
of each person using the social network [8].
The obtained social network data are integrated as extended
FOAF files and stored in database. Users can adjust
networks if needed (Fig. 3). The social relationship and its
tie strength become guiding principles when a user determines
an access control list to information.
2.3
Social Network Analysis for Information
Sharing
The system enables users to analyze their social networks
to provide awareness of the information dissemination process
within the social network.
Social network analysis (SNA) is distinguishable from other
fields of sociology by its focus on relationships between actors
rather than attributes of actors, a network view, and
a belief that structure affects substantive outcomes.
Because
an actor's position in a network affects information
dissemination, SNA provides an important implication for
information sharing on the social network. For example, occupying
a favored position means that the actor will have
better access to information, resources, and social support.
The SNA models are based on graphs, with graph measures
, such as centrality, that are defined using a sociological
interpretation of graph structure. Freeman proposes numerous
ways to measure centrality [2]. Considering a social network
of actors, the simplest measure is to count the number
of others with whom an actor maintains relations. The actor
with the most connections, the highest degree, is most
central. This measure is called degreeness. Another measure
is closeness, which calculates the distance from each
actor in the network to every other actor based on connections
among all network members. Central actors are closer
to all others than are other actors. A third measure is betweenness
, which examines the extent to which an actor is
situated among others in the network, the extent to which
83
Figure 5: Web site for sharing research information
information must pass through them to get to others, and
consequently, the extent to which they are exposed to information
circulation within the network. If the betweenness
of an actor is high, it frequently acts as a local bridge that
connects the individual to other actors outside a group. In
terms of network ties, this kind of bridge is well known as
Granovetter's "weak tie" [5], which contrasts with "strong
tie" within a densely-closed group.
As the weak tie becomes a bridge between different groups,
a large community often breaks up to a set of closely knit
group of individuals, woven together more loosely according
to occasional interaction among groups. Based on this
theory, social network analysis offers a number of clustering
algorithms for identifying communities based on network
data.
The system provides users with these network analyses
(Fig. 4) so that they can decide who can access their information
. For example, if user wants to diffuse her information
, she might consider granting access to a person (with
certain trust) who has both high degreeness and betweenness
. On the other hand, she must be aware of betweenness
when the information is private or confidential. Clustering
is useful when a user wishes to share information within a
certain group.
APPLICATION
To demonstrate and evaluate our system, we developed a
community site (Fig. 5) using communication tools such as
Weblogs, Wikis, and Forums. By that system, studies from
different organizations and projects can be disseminated and
their information thereby shared. Users can share various
information such as papers, ideas, reports, and schedules at
the site. Our system is integrated into a site that provides
access control to that information. Integrating our system
takes advantage of the open and information nature of the
communication tools. It also maintains the privacy of the
content and activities of those applications.
Users can manage their social networks (Fig. 3) and attach
the access control list to their content (e.g., Blog entries
, profiles, and Wiki pages) using extracted social relationships
and social network analysis (Fig. 4).
Once a user determines the access control list, she can save
it as her information access policy for corresponding content.
The access policy is described using extended eXtensible
Access Control Markup Language (XACML) and is stored
in a database. She can reuse and modify the previous policy
if she subsequently creates a similar content.
One feature of our system is that it is easily adaptable to
new applications because of its plug-and-play design. We
are planning to integrate it into various Web sites and applications
such as social network sites and RSS readers.
RELATED WORKS AND CONCLUSIONS
Goecks and Mynatt propose a Saori infrastructure that
also uses social networks for information sharing [3]. They
obtain social networks from users' email messages and provide
sharing policies based on the type of information. We
obtain social networks from various sources and integrate
them into FOAF files. This facilitates the importation and
maintenance of social network data. Another feature is that
our system enables users to analyze their social networks.
Thereby, users can control information dissemination more
effectively and flexibly than through the use of pre-defined
policies.
As users increasingly disseminate their information on the
Web, privacy concerns demand that access to particular information
be limited.
We propose a real-world oriented
information sharing system using social networks. It enables
users to control the information dissemination process
within social networks, just as they are in the real world.
Future studies will evaluate the system with regard to how
it contributes to wider and safer information sharing than it
would otherwise. We will also develop a distributed system
that can be used fully on the current Web.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Brickley and L. Miller. FOAF: the 'friend of a
friend' vocabulary. http://xmlns. com/foaf/0.1/, 2004.
[2] L. C. Freeman. Centrality in social networks:
Conceptual clarification, Social Networks, Vol.1,
pp.215­239, 1979.
[3] J. Goecks and E. D. Mynatt. Leveraging Social
Networks for Information Sharing In Proc. of
CSCW'04, 2004.
[4] J. Golbeck, J. Hendler, and B. Parsia. Trust networks
on the semantic web, in Proc. WWW 2003, 2003.
[5] M. Granovetter. Strength of weak ties, American
Journal of Sociology, Vol.18, pp.1360­1380, 1973.
[6] C. Masolo, S. Borgo, A. Gangemi, N. Guarinno, and
A. Oltramari. WonderWeb Deliverable D18,
http://wonderweb.semanticweb.org/deliverable/D18.shtml
[7] Y. Matsuo, M. Hamasaki, J. Mori, H. Takeda and K.
Hasida. Ontological Consideration on Human
Relationship Vocabulary for FOAF. In Proc. of the 1st
Workshop on Friend of a Friend, Social Networking
and Semantic Web, 2004.
[8] Y. Matsuo, H. Tomobe, K. Hasida, M. Ishiz uka.
Finding Social Network for Trust Calculation. In
Proc. of 16th European Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, 2004.
84

