An Integrated Environment to Visually Construct 3D Animations
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we present an expressive 3D animation environment
that enables users to rapidly and visually prototype animated
worlds with a fully 3D user-interface. A 3D device allows the
specification of complex 3D motion, while virtual tools are visible
mediators that live in the same 3D space as application objects and
supply the interaction metaphors to control them.  In our
environment, there is no intrinsic difference between user interface
and application objects. Multi-way constraints provide
the necessary tight coupling among components that makes it
possible to seamlessly compose animated and interactive
behaviors. By recording the effects of manipulations, all the
expressive power of the 3D user interface is exploited to define
animations. Effective editing of recorded manipulations is made
possible by compacting all continuous parameter evolutions with
an incremental data-reduction algorithm, designed to preserve
both geometry and timing. The automatic generation of editable
representations of interactive performances overcomes one of the
major limitations of current performance animation systems.
Novel interactive solutions to animation problems are made
possible by the tight integration of all system components. In
particular, animations can be synchronized by using constrained
manipulation during playback. The accompanying video-tape
illustrates our approach with interactive sequences showing the
visual construction of 3D animated worlds. All the demonstrations
in the video were recorded live and were not edited.

CRS4, Scientific Visualization Group, Via Nazario Sauro 10,
09123 Cagliari, Italy.
E-mail:
{gobbetti|balaguer}@crs4.it
WWW:
http://www.crs4.it/~gobbetti
http://www.crs4.it/~balaguer
INTRODUCTION
Modern 3D graphics systems allow a rapidly growing user
community to create and animate increasingly sophisticated
worlds. Despite their inherent three-dimensionality, these systems
are still largely controlled by 2D WIMP user-interfaces. The lack
of correlation between manipulation and effect and the high
cognitive distance from users to edited models are the major
drawbacks of this solution [13]. The inadequacy of user-interfaces
based on 2D input devices and mindsets becomes particularly
evident in the realm of interactive 3D animation. In this case, the
low-bandwidth communication between user-interface and
application and the restrictions in interactive 3D motion
specification capabilities make it extremely difficult to define
animations with straight-ahead actions. This inability to
interactively specify the animation timing is a major obstacle in all
cases where the spontaneity of the animated object's behavior is
important [21; 35; 4].
In this paper, we present an expressive 3D animation
environment that enables users to rapidly and visually prototype
animated worlds with a fully 3D user-interface. A 3D device
allows the specification of complex 3D motion, while virtual tools
supply the interaction metaphors to control application objects. In
our environment, there is no intrinsic difference between user interface
and application objects. Multi-way constraints provide
the necessary tight coupling among components that makes it
possible to compose animated and interactive behaviors. By
recording the effects of manipulations, all the expressive power of
the 3D user interface is exploited to define animations. Effective
editing of recorded manipulations is made possible by compacting
all continuous parameter evolutions with our data-reduction
algorithm, designed to preserve both geometry and timing. Novel
interactive solutions to animation problems are made possible by
the tight integration of all system components. In particular,
animations can be synchronized using constrained manipulation
during playback.
In the following sections, we present an overview of the
system, we make comparisons with related work, and we conclude
with a view of future directions. The accompanying video-tape
illustrates our approach with interactive sequences showing the
visual construction of 3D animated worlds. All demonstrations in
the video were recorded live and were not edited.
SYSTEM OVERVIEW
Our animation environment is built on top of  VB2  [17; 18], a
graphics architecture based on objects and constraints. During
interaction, the user is the source of a flow of information
propagating from input device sensors to manipulated models.
Permission to make digital/hard copy of part or all of this work 
for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided  
that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial  
advantage, the copyright notice, the title of the publication and 
its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission 
of ACM, Inc.  To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on 
servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific 
permission and/or a fee. 
©1995  ACM-0-89791-701-4/95/008...$3.50
395
VB2 applications are represented by a network of interrelated
objects, and the maintenance of relationships is delegated to a
constraint-based change propagation mechanism. Different
primitive elements represent the various aspects of the system's
state and behavior:  active variables  store the system's state,
domain-independent hierarchical constraints  [9] maintain multi way
relations between active variables,  daemons provide support
for discrete simulation tasks, and  indirect expressions   allow
constraints and daemons to dynamically locate their variables.
Constraints are maintained using an efficient local propagation
algorithm based on  Skyblue [27; 17; 18]. The solver is domain independent
and can maintain a hierarchy of multi-way, multi output
dataflow constraints. The fact that constraint solving
consists in performing method selection on the basis of constraint
priorities and graph structure, without considering the variables'
values, allows an effective application of a lazy evaluation
strategy [17; 18]. The main drawback of such a local propagation
algorithm is the limitation to acyclic constraint graphs. However,
as noted by Sannella et al. [28], cyclic constraint networks are
seldom encountered in the construction of user interfaces, and
limiting the constraint solver to graphs without cycles gives
enough efficiency and flexibility to create highly responsive
complex interactive systems. In  VB2 , the objects' internal
constraint networks are designed so as to reduce the possibility of
creating cyclic constraint graphs. Runtime introduction of a
constraint that would create a cyclic graph causes an exception
that can be handled to remove the offending constraint
1.
The state manager behavior and the constraint solving
techniques are detailed in [17; 18].
2.2 Interaction
The system's desktop configuration uses keyboard commands to
trigger mode changes and animation playback, a  Spaceball for
continuous specification of spatial transformations, and a mouse
for picking. Both hands are thus used simultaneously to input
information. LCD shutter glasses provide binocular perception of
the synthetic world. Since our main research goal is to explore the
potentialities of 3D interaction, we do not provide a two dimensional
graphical user interface. A 3D cursor, controlled by
the Spaceball , is used to select and manipulate objects of the
synthetic world.
Direct manipulation and virtual tools are the two techniques
used to input information. Both techniques involve using mediator
objects that transform the cursor's movements into modifications
of manipulated objects. Virtual tools are visible first class objects
that live in the same 3D space as application objects and offer the
interaction metaphor to control them. Their visual appearance is
determined by a modeling hierarchy, while their behavior is
controlled by an internal constraint network [18].
As in the real world, users configure their workspaces by
selecting tools, positioning and orienting them in space, and
binding them to application objects. At the moment of binding, the
tool decides whether to accept the connection by checking if the
application object contains all the needed information and by
verifying that the constraint graph obtained by connecting the tool
to the model can be handled by the underlying solver (i.e. it is
acyclic). The binding mechanism is defined in a declarative way
by  using indirect constraints [18].
1
VB2's current constraint solver  [17; 28] is unable to find acyclic
solutions of potentially cyclic constraint graphs. An algorithm that
removes this limitation is presented in [36].
Information control
Information display
MODEL
TOOL
v1
v2
c1
c2
bound
bound.v1
bound.v2
v1
v2
out_variable
in_variable
constraint
in_out_variable
direct reference
indirect reference
Instance
(a)
(b)
Figure 1a.
Design notation
Figure 1b.
Model and virtual tool
When bound, the tool changes its visual appearance to a shape that
provides information about its behavior and offers semantic
feedback. During manipulation, the tool's and the application
object's constraint networks remain continuously connected, so as
to ensure information propagation. Multiple tools can be active
simultaneously in the same 3D environment in order to control all
its aspects. The environment's consistency is continuously ensured
by the underlying constraint solver. The bi-directionality of the
relationships between user-interface and application objects makes
it possible to use virtual tools to interact with a dynamic
environment, opening the door to the integration of animation and
interaction techniques.
2.3 Animation
By recording the effects of manipulations, animations can be
sketched. In order to be able to edit the captured performance, a
compact representation of continuous parameter evolution must be
obtained. This representation must not only precisely approximate
the shape of the initial parameter curves but also their timing. The
data reduction algorithm must therefore treat the geometry and
time components simultaneously in order to avoid the introduction
of errors that would be difficult to control. We have developed an
algorithm that incrementally builds, from the input sequence, a
parametric B-spline preserving value and time of each input
sample within a given tolerance. It is an incremental version of the
Lyche and Mørken algorithm [22] that works in parallel with the
interactive specification by considering only a small portion of the
input curve at any time. Latency time and memory requirements
for handling each portion of the curve are constant. Data reduction
may therefore be performed concurrently with interactive
parameter input, and the responsiveness of the application can be
ensured when handling animations defined by any number of
samples. The algorithm is presented in detail in [2; 4]. This
performance-based approach complements key-framing by
providing the ability to create animations with straight-ahead
actions. It provides complete control over the animation shape and
timing, while key-framing offers control only at a limited number
of points.
The mediation of virtual tools makes it possible to sketch the
evolution of non-geometric attributes, while constrained or free
motion can be specified with 3D devices. Since these devices offer
continuous control of spatial transformations, subtle
synchronizations between position and orientation components
can be directly specified. In our environment, straight-ahead
animations are defined by expressing the desire to record
parameter evolution during interaction. This is done simply by
pressing a different mouse button when starting an interaction
task. A controller object is connected to each animatable model
and is responsible for monitoring model state changes. While
recording, all changes are handled by the controller to feed the
animation tracks. Continuous tracks apply the data reduction
396
algorithm to the incoming information, while discrete tracks
simply store a change value event. During playback, information
propagates from the animation tracks through the controllers and
down to the models. All connections are realized by bi-directional
constraints. Since playback constraints are weaker than interaction
constraints, the user can take control over animated models during
playback.

Animations involving synchronizations with the
environment's evolution can thus be specified by interacting
during playback [5].
Discrete
Track
Interaction
Mediator
Data reduction
Data sampling
Editing
Animation recording
Animation playback
Continuous
Track
Application
Object
Animation
Controller
Figure 2.
Interactive animation and playback
RELATED WORK
Constraint-based architectures have long been used for 2D
graphics systems (see [28] for a survey). In the 3D graphics world,
one-way constraints are commonly employed to maintain
dependencies between components [20; 34; 37; 38]. This type of
constraint cannot easily model mutual relations between objects,
thus hindering the tight coupling between user-interface and
application objects [28]. Our system uses instead multi-way local
propagation constraints, which offer support for two-way
communication between objects while remaining efficient enough
to ensure the responsiveness of the system [17; 18; 27].  TBAG
[14] also uses multi-way constraints maintained by  Skyblue  [27],
but its functional approach concentrates more on modeling time varying
behaviors than on creating interactive systems. Much
effort has been spent in developing powerful numerical solvers for
computer graphics (e.g. [7; 15; 16]). This work is complementary
to ours, which focuses more on providing ways to interact with
constrained environments. Such advanced solvers could replace
local propagation in our system for the maintenance of numerical
relationships.
3.2 Three-dimensional User Interfaces
Much recent research has focused on obtaining rich interaction
with 3D environments by means of advanced devices and 3D
interaction metaphors [8; 10; 11; 13; 16; 19; 26; 30; 32].  3D
widgets or manipulators, similar to our virtual tools, are presented
in [13; 32]. These works focused on providing support for 3D
widget construction, while we concentrate more on the integration
of multiple tools in a single dynamic environment. We are not
aware of any attempts to apply the results of 3D interaction
research to enhance animation capabilities.
3.3 Performance Animation
A number of authors have proposed using live performances to
drive computer animations (e.g. [1; 23; 33; 35]). We strive to
bring the expressiveness of these approaches to general purpose
animation systems running on graphics workstations. Instead of
relying on advanced motion capture devices, we exploit our fully
3D user-interface to control the animated environment at a higher
level of abstraction. The guiding approach proposed in [23] also
seeks to provide better control of synthetic objects by raising the
abstraction level of user interaction. That work concentrates on
modeling complex behaviors in a discrete simulation framework,
while we focus on providing intuitive user interfaces. A major
limitation of current performance animation systems is the
inability to build editable representations out of captured
performances [35].
3.4 Data Reduction
Data reduction or curve fitting techniques have been successfully
applied for the interactive specification of 2D or 3D curves or
surfaces (e.g. [12; 24; 25; 29]). These techniques cannot be easily
adapted to sketching animations of multi-dimensional parameters
because they all exhibit one or more of the following problems: (i)
restriction to 2D or 3D geometric constructions, (ii) lack of control
on parameterization errors, and (iii) need to consider the entire
input curve before reduction. An early attempt to use data reduction
for animation is described in [29]. In that system, path
geometry and path timing specifications were decoupled, loosing
thus the advantages of performance approaches. Banks and Cohen
[6] proposed for their drafting tool an incremental version of the
Lyche and Mørken algorithm [22] that does not have the
aforementioned drawbacks and could be used in a performance
animation context. Their method shares with ours the idea of
processing successive portions of the input curve which are then
spliced together, but is unable to ensure constant latency times and
memory needs [4].
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this video-paper, we have presented an integrated environment
for the rapid and visual prototyping of 3D animated worlds. Using
our fully 3D user-interface, non-professional users can swiftly
create complex animations with pose-to-pose and straight-ahead
techniques. Thanks to automatic data-reduction, animations
created by interactive performances can then be effectively edited.
In our future work, we intend to develop new virtual tools and
visualizations that will improve our 3D user interface for discrete
and continuous track manipulation. To allow the system to adhere
to timing requirements, we are developing time-critical techniques
for controlling rendering complexity and constraint evaluation.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Ronan Boulic for providing the
walking engine used in the interactive sequences, Sally Kleinfeldt
as well as Dean Allaman for helpful comments and suggestions,
Angelo Mangili for technical help, and Michele Müller for doing
the voice on the video.
This research was conducted by the authors while at the Swiss
Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne.
397

REFERENCES
[1]
Baecker RM (1969) Picture-driven Animation.  Proc. Spring
Joint  Computer Conference 34: 273-288.
[2]
Balaguer JF (1993)  Virtual Studio: Un système d'animation
en environnement virtuel . PhD Thesis, Swiss Federal
Institute of Technology in Lausanne.
[3]
Balaguer JF, Gobbetti E (1995) Animating Spaceland. To
appear in IEEE Computer Special Isssue on Real-world
Virtual Environments 28(7).
[4]
Balaguer JF, Gobbetti E (1995) Sketching 3D Animations.
To appear in Proc. EUROGRAPHICS.
[5]
Balaguer JF, Gobbetti E (1995) Supporting Interactive
Animation using Multi-way Constraints. Submitted for
publication.
[6]
Banks M, Cohen E (1990) Real-time Spline Curves from
Interactively Sketched Data.  Proc. SIGGRAPH Symposium
on Interactive 3D Graphics: 99-107
[7]
Barzel R, Barr A (1988) A Modeling System Based on
Dynamic Constraints.  Proc. SIGGRAPH: 179-188.
[8]
Bier EA (1990) Snap-Dragging in Three Dimensions.  Proc.
SIGGRAPH Symposium on Interactive 3D Graphics : 193 204
.
[9]
Borning A, Freeman-Benson B, Wilson M (1992) Constraint
Hierarchies.  Lisp and Symbolic Computation 5(3): 221-268.
[10] Butterworth J, Davidson A, Hench S, Olano TM (1992)
3DM: A Three Dimensional Modeler Using a Head-Mounted
Display.  Proc. SIGGRAPH Symposium on Interactive 3D
Graphics: 135-138.
[11] Card SK, Robertson GG, Mackinlay JD (1991) The
Information Visualizer: An Information Workspace.  Proc.
SIGCHI : 181-188.
[12] Chou JJ, Piegl LA (1992) Data Reduction Using Cubic
Rational Splines.  IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications
12(3): 60-68.
[13] Conner DB, Snibbe SS, Herndon KP, Robbins DC, Zeleznik
RC, Van Dam A (1992) Three-Dimensional Widgets.
SIGGRAPH Symposium on Interactive 3D Graphics : 183 188
.
[14] Elliott C, Schechter G, Yeung R, Abi-Ezzi S (1994) TBAG:
A High Level Framework for Interactive, Animated 3D
Graphics Applications. Proc. SIGGRAPH: 421-434.
[15] Gleicher M (1993) A Graphics Toolkit Based on Differential
Constraints.  Proc. UIST : 109-120.
[16] Gleicher M, Witkin A (1992) Through-the-Lens Camera
Control. Proc. SIGGRAPH: 331-340.
[17] Gobbetti E (1993)  Virtuality Builder II: Vers une
architecture pour l'interaction avec des modes sysnthétiques.
PhD Thesis, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in
Lausanne.
[18] Gobbetti E, Balaguer JF (1993) VB2: A Framework for
Interaction in Synthetic Worlds.  Proc. UIST: 167-178.
[19] Herndon KP, van Dam A, Gleicher M (1994) Report:
Workshop on the Challenges of 3D Interaction, CHI
Bulletin, October.
[20] Kass M (1992) CONDOR: Constraint-based Dataflow. Proc.
SIGGRAPH: 321-330.
[21] Lasseter J (1987) Principles of Traditional Animation
Applied to 3D Computer Animation.  Proc. SIGGRAPH: 35 44
.
[22] Lyche T, Mørken K (1987) Knot Removal for Parametric B spline
Curves and Surfaces. Computer Aided Geometric
Design 4: 217-230.
[23] McKenna M, Pieper S, Zeltzer D (1990) Control of a Virtual
Actor: The Roach.  Proc. SIGGRAPH Symposium on
Interactive 3D Graphics: 165-174.
[24] Plass M, Stone M (1983) Curve Fitting with Piecewise
Parametric Cubics. Proc. SIGGRAPH: 229-239.
[25] Pudet T (1994) Real Time Fitting of Hand Sketched Pressure
Brushstrokes. Proc. EUROGRAPHICS: 205-220.
[26] Sachs E, Roberts A, Stoops D (1990) 3-Draw: A Tool for
Designing 3D Shapes. IEEE Computer Graphics and
Applications 11(6): 18-26.
[27] Sannella M (1994) Skyblue: A Multi-Way Local Propagation
Constraint Solver for User Interface Construction. Proc.
UIST : 137-146.
[28] Sannella M, Maloney J, Freeman-Benson B, Borning A
(1992) Multi-way versus One-way Constraints in User Interfaces
. Software Practice and Experience 23(5): 529-566.
[29] Schneider PJ (1988)  Phoenix: An Interactive Curve Design
System Based on the Automatic Fitting of Hand-Sketched
Curves.  Master's Thesis, University of Washington.
[30] Shaw C, Green M (1994) Two-Handed Polygonal Surface
Design. Proc. UIST : 212-215.
[31] Shelley KL, Greenberg DP (1982) Path Specification and
Path Coherence. Proc. SIGGRAPH: 157-166.
[32] Strauss PS, Carey R (1992) An Object-Oriented 3D Graphics
Toolkit.  Proc. SIGGRAPH: 341-347.
[33] Tice S (1993) VActor Animation Creation System.
SIGGRAPH Tutorial 1.
[34] Upson C, Fulhauber T, Kamins D, Laidlaw D, Schlegel D,
Vroom J, Gurwitz R, van Dam A (1989) The Application
Visualization System: A Computational Environment for
Scientific Visualization. IEEE CG&A 9(4): 30-42.
[35] Walters G (1993) Performance Animation at PDI.
SIGGRAPH Tutorial 1.
[36] Vander Zanden B (1995)  An Incremental Algorithm for
Satisfying Hierarchies of Multi-way, Dataflow Constraints .
Technical Report, University of Tennessee, Knoxville.
[37] Zeleznik RC, Conner DB, Wlocka MM, Aliaga DG, Wang
NT, Hubbard PM, Knepp B, Kaufman H, Hughes JF, van
Dam A (1991) An Object-Oriented Framework for the
Integration of Interactive Animation Techniques.  Proc.
SIGGRAPH: 105-112.
[38] Zeltzer D, Pieper S, Sturman DJ (1989) An Integrated
Graphical Simulation Platform.  Proc. Graphics Interface:
266-274.
398
