SensorBus: A Middleware Model for Wireless Sensor Networks
ABSTRACT
The use of middleware eases the development of distributed 
applications by abstracting the intricacies (communication and 
coordination among software components) of the distributed 
network environment. In wireless sensor networks, this is even 
trickier because of their specific issues such as addressing, 
mobility, number of sensors and energy-limited nodes. This paper 
describes SensorBus, a message-oriented middleware (MOM) 
model for wireless sensor networks based on the publish-subscribe
paradigm and that allows the free exchange of the 
communication mechanism among sensor nodes allowing as 
result the capability of using more than one communication 
mechanism to address the requirements of larger number of 
applications. We intend to provide a platform which addresses the 
main characteristics of wireless sensor networks and also allows 
the development of energy-efficient applications. SensorBus 
incorporates constraint and query languages which will aid the 
development of interactive applications. It intends with the 
utilization of filters reduces data movement minimizing the 
energy consumption of nodes.
INTRODUCTION
Recent advances in wireless networking technology, low-power 
digital circuits, sensing materials and Micro Electro-Mechanical
Systems (MEMS) opened up the possibility of building small 
sensor devices capable of data processing, remote sensing and 
wireless communication. When several small sensors are scattered 
and linked over an area we may call this arrangement a "Sensor 
Network". These networks can be used for collecting and 
analyzing data from the physical environment. More specifically, 
sensor networks are comprised of hundreds or even thousands of 
heterogeneous sensor nodes exchanging information to perform 
distributed sensing and collaborative data processing [1].
From a functional perspective sensor networks behave like 
distributed systems with many different types of sensor nodes. 
Given the diversity of node functionality and the size of these 
networks it is important for a user to be able to program and 
manage the distributed applications that perform the information 
gathering. A programmer may develop these applications using 
operating system primitives. This kind of procedure, however, 
brings another level of complexity to the programmer, in which 
he not only has to deal with low-level primitives but he will also 
have to treat issues concerning communication and coordination 
among software components distributed over the network. A 
much friendlier approach is the utilization of a middleware in 
order to provide higher-level primitives to hide issues concerning 
the distributed environment.
Traditional middleware is not suited to this task because of the 
characteristics of wireless networks. For example, conventional 
middleware designed for wired networks raises exceptions when 
they do not find a specific component, but this situation is much 
more like the standard than the exception in wireless 
environments. The lower bandwidth available for wireless 
networks requires optimizing the transport of data and this is not 
considered in conventional middleware. The coordination 
primitives of these middleware products do not take into account 
the frequent disconnections that happen in wireless networks. 
Another problem is the size and computing requirements of these 
middleware products; they are often too large and too heavy to be 
running in a device with so few resources. Finally, the 
transparency level provided is not sufficient enough because the

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
LANC'05, October 10-12, 2005, Cali, Colombia 
(c) 2005 ACM 1-59593-008-6/05/0010..$5.00
2
application running in such devices needs information about the 
execution context to better adapt itself.
A series of new middleware environments were proposed to deal 
with the requirements imposed by the wireless environment [2]. 
Middleware products based on computing reflection are designed 
to be light (concerning the computing power required to run) and 
easily configurable. Middleware based on tuple space were 
proposed to address the problem of frequent disconnections, and 
present a more natural way to deal with asynchronous 
communication. Context-aware middleware includes the ability of 
an application to access its information context (context-awareness
). These proposals addressed adequately the issues 
brought by the mobile networks, but are not well suited to support 
the specific requirements of the target applications used or to be 
used in wireless sensor networks because they are designed to 
support traditional client-server applications used in regular 
(wired) environments.
Wireless sensor networks are very similar to conventional 
wireless networks; including energy-limited nodes, low 
bandwidth and communication channels more prone to errors. 
However, communication in wireless sensor nets differs from the 
end-to-end connections often necessary in usual networks [1]. In 
other words, the function of the network is to report information 
considering the phenomenon to the observer who is not 
necessarily aware that the sensor infrastructure is being used as a 
means of communication. In addition, energy is much more 
limited in sensor networks than in other types of wireless nets due 
to the nature of the sensor devices and the difficulty of reloading 
batteries in hostile regions. Some works have shown that the 
execution of 3000 instructions costs the same amount of energy 
necessary to send 1-bit of data over 100 meters via radio [3]. 
Those studies indicate that we must prioritize computing over 
communications.
The communication issues are addressed in the several routing 
protocols proposed for wireless sensor nets. The communication 
model allows other ways of addressing the sensor nodes besides 
single addressing. The sensor nodes can be addressed by their 
own attributes or by attributes extracted from the physical 
environment (attribute-based naming). The sharp limitation of 
energy demands that sensor nodes actively take part in the 
processing and dissemination of information in order to save as 
much energy as possible. Although the majority of the protocols 
reviewed are efficient in saving energy, they differ in addressing 
capabilities. Some of them utilize single addressing [4] while 
others utilize attribute-based naming [5]. Thus, each type of 
application requires an adaptation of the communication 
mechanism to address specific application issues.
Trying to overcome these problems this paper proposes 
SensorBus,  a message oriented middleware for sensor networks 
allowing the free exchanging of the communication mechanism 
among sensor nodes. We propose a platform that provides 
facilities for the development of energy-efficient applications and 
that also addresses the key characteristics of sensor networks. 
This type of middleware should be suited to perform 
environmental monitoring where single addressing is demanded 
(small areas) as well as where attribute-based naming is necessary 
(large areas).
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 
describes the type of sensor networks considered in this research; 
Section 3 presents the target application and explains its 
requirements; Section 4 broaches the abstractions and 
mechanisms needed to address the requirements listed on the 
previous section; Section 5 describes the components of the 
SensorBus architecture; Section 6 presents the communication 
architecture and explains the steps needed to develop an 
application using SensorBus; Section 7 broaches implementing 
and coding issue; Section 8 presents the related works, and finally 
Section 9 concludes the paper.
ASSUMPTIONS
Most of the algorithms catalogued in the sensor networks 
literature are hypothetical [1], i.e., they were proposed as an 
experiment and were not tested in real networks (although many 
of them were deployed in testbed environments). This research is 
no different. When we speak about wireless sensor networks, we 
are referring to the projected and experimental designs and 
deployments discussed in the literature and not to actual instances 
of wireless sensor networks deployed in the field.
Differently from the real settings, the testbed environments are 
built and organized focusing on the network features one wants to 
observe and test. This organization involves three main 
components: infrastructure, network protocols and applications 
[6]. The infrastructure is formed of sensor nodes and their 
topology ­ the way they were scattered over a determined region. 
The network protocol is responsible for the creation and 
maintenance of communication links between sensor nodes and 
the applications. The applications extract information about a 
determined phenomenon through the sensor nodes. The following 
topics introduce in more details the assumptions made considering 
those aspects.
2.1

Applications
The way in which the applications gather data from the sensor 
nodes depends on the network design. In the literature, we found 
that there are four data transfer modes between sensor nodes and 
applications: continuous, event-oriented, query-oriented and 
hybrid [6]. In the continuous model, sensor nodes transfer their 
data continuously at a predefined rate. In the event-oriented 
model, nodes transfer data only when an event of interest occurs. 
In the query-oriented model the application is responsible for 
deciding which events are of interest, thus requesting data about a 
phenomenon. Lastly, in the hybrid model, the three approaches 
may coexist together. In this research, we adopt a hybrid approach 
in the way that it utilizes the query and the event-oriented model 
as will be shown in the target application presented in Section 3.
2.2

Network Protocol
The performance of the network protocol is influenced by the 
communications model adopted, the packet data transfer mode 
and the network mobility.  In order to evaluate how a network 
protocol behaves it is important to take into account these aspects.
Communication in sensor networks is classified in two major 
categories [6]: application and infrastructure. Application 
communication consists of the transfer of data obtained by the 
sensor nodes to the observer. This kind of communication is of
3
two types: cooperative and non-cooperative. In cooperative mode 
sensor nodes exchange data among themselves before 
transmitting the data gathered. In non-cooperative mode, 
however, sensor nodes do not exchange any kind of information; 
each one is solely responsible for reporting its collected data. The 
infrastructure data refers to the information needed to set, 
maintain and optimize the running network. As the network 
protocol must support both categories, the SensorBus architecture 
will not address those issues.
The packet data transfer is a routing issue concerning the network 
protocol. This routing is divided into three types:  flooding, 
unicast and multicast  [6]. In the flooding approach, the sensor 
node broadcasts its information to neighboring nodes that, in turn, 
broadcast this information to their neighboring nodes until the 
information reaches the destination node. Alternatively, the sensor 
node may transmit its data directly to the observer using unicast 
multi-hop routing and also might use a cluster-head through one-to
-one unicast. Lastly, the multicast approach casts information to 
predefined groups of nodes. The routing protocol is responsible 
for treating packet data transfer relieving SensorBus of these 
issues.
Regarding mobility, sensor networks are divided into static and 
dynamic [6]. In static nets there is no movement by sensor nodes, 
the observers or the phenomenon to be studied. Conversely, in 
dynamic networks the nodes, observers and the phenomenon 
might well change their locations. This kind of network is further 
classified by the mobility of its components in dynamic nets with 
mobile observer, dynamic nets with mobile sensors and dynamic 
nets with mobile phenomena respectively. In the first, the 
observer is mobile in relation to the sensors and phenomena; in 
the second; the sensors are moving with respect to each other and 
the observer; and in the later; the phenomenon itself is in motion. 
The routing protocol is also responsible for treating mobility 
issues, relieving SensorBus of these concerns.
2.3

Infrastructure
As for the infrastructure, the issues to take into consideration are 
location, access point and sensor node's computing power. The 
nodes have well-know locations and are to be scattered over a 
well-defined area. We will assume that all information is 
transmitted and received by means of a unique access point called 
the sink node. Despite the fact that, for this model, we will 
consider all nodes as being the same, there is nothing to prevent 
one node from having more memory, more energy or more 
computing power available.
ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING APPLICATIONS
Environmental Monitoring Applications are used to evaluate 
qualitatively and quantitatively the natural resources of a 
determined area. These applications collect data, analyze and 
follow continuously and systematically environmental variables 
in order to identify current patterns and predict future trends [7]. 
Environmental monitoring provides information about the factors 
influencing conservation, preservation, degradation and 
environmental recovery. One might consider it a tool of 
evaluation and control.
Wireless sensor networks can be used for performing 
environmental monitoring in indoor locations such as a building 
or a house or outdoors locations such as forests, lakes, deserts, 
rivers, etc. Internal monitoring might be described as tracking the 
variables in an indoor location. For example, one might deploy an 
infrared camera to track motion in a room that is supposed to be 
secure; if motion is detected an internal device might trigger an 
alarm. Sometimes in order to detect and identify an event, 
information from more than one sensor might be required. These 
results are processed and compared with the signature of the event 
of interest. In outdoor monitoring, there may be thousands of 
sensors scattered over an area and when an event of interest 
occurs such as temperature change, moisture change or CO2 
increase the sensor might trigger the management events module 
which in turn sends the observer a signal to notify him or her of 
the event. Wireless sensors might be useful in a way that can save 
money in deploying a sensor infrastructure such as described in 
[8] where the authors were able to decrease the number of sensors 
needed to monitor forest fires in comparison with a wired model.
In summary, the value of a wireless sensor network relies in its 
ability to provide information over a large area in reply to the 
questions put to users. The query mode is the most common 
approach used. Another approach is the mode in which sensors 
may remain waiting for some event to happen. By observing these 
aspects we draw the first requirement (R1) of our middleware 
model: The system must be able to function in two modes: query-driven
and event-oriented.
Depending on the application would be more convenient to access 
a specific node or a specific property. For example, in internal 
environmental monitoring, if one wants to know the temperature 
of a determined room you will have to access the information 
collected by a specific sensor, thus requiring unique node 
addressing and identification. On the other hand, in external 
environmental monitoring, sensor nodes do not need to be 
uniquely identified, as in this kind of application the purpose is to 
collect the value of a certain variable in a given area. From that 
observation we extract the second requirement (R2): The system 
must be able to address uniquely the sensor nodes and also by 
attribute (property to be observed).
In some applications the mobility of sensor nodes must be taken 
into account. For example, sensors scattered over a forest for 
collecting dampness and temperature data are to be static, i.e. they 
must not change its geographical location, while that placing 
sensors in a river's surface for collecting data about its 
contamination levels characterizes a mobile environment. Thus, 
the third requirement (R3) of our middleware model is taking into 
consideration mobility issues.
The sensing coverage area of a given wireless node is smaller 
than its radio coverage. Besides, sensors operate in noisy 
environments. To achieve a trustworthy sensory resolution a high 
density of sensors is required. In some applications the size of the 
coverage area leads to a great number of sensor nodes. A simple 
application in the field of environmental monitoring such as 
surveillance of oceans and forests requires from hundreds to 
thousands of nodes. In other applications, like internal 
environmental monitoring, the amount of nodes is limited by the 
size of the area. Therefore, the fourth requirement (R4) is to take 
into account the size of the network.
4
In external environmental monitoring, the nodes are spread in a 
hostile region, where it is not possible to access them for 
maintenance. The lifetime of each sensor node depends 
exclusively on the little available energy for the node. To 
conserve energy, the speed of the CPU and the bandwidth of the 
RF channel (Radio Frequency) must be limited. This requirement 
adds some restrictions in CPU performance, memory size, RF 
bandwidth and in battery size. In applications where the sensors 
are not spread in a hostile region it is possible to access them for 
maintenance and the battery lifetime of each sensor does not 
become a critical aspect. Finally, the fifth requirement (R5) is to 
take into consideration the limited energy resources of each 
sensor node.
MECHANISMS AND ABSTRACTIONS
This middleware model is comprised of three mechanisms and 
one abstraction. The publish-subscribe paradigm is employed as 
well as constraints and query languages and application filters to 
meet R1, R2 and R5 requirements. The design patterns abstraction 
is used to meet R2, R3 and R4 requirements.
4.1

Publish-Subscribe Paradigm
The SensorBus is a Message Oriented Middleware (MOM) that 
employs the publish-subscribe paradigm. In this approach, a 
component that generates events (producer) publishes the types of 
events that will be available to other components (consumers) [9]. 
The consumer interested in a determined event "subscribes" to 
this event, receiving from this moment on notifications about the 
event "subscribed" to. These notifications are sent 
asynchronously from producers to all interested consumers.  The 
MOM performs the functions of collecting producer's messages, 
filtering and transforming such messages (when necessary) and 
routing them to the appropriate consumers.
The publish-subscribe communication is anonymous, 
asynchronous and multicast.  Data are sent and received by 
asynchronous broadcast messages, based in subject, independent 
from identity and location of producers and consumers. This kind 
of communication enlists desirable properties for sensor 
networks; for example, this model saves energy while a given 
node does not need to be waiting for a synchronous response to 
proceed as it is in networks that implements end-to-end 
connections, increasing the lifetime of the network. Furthermore, 
as it also implements multicast, a group of sensor might be 
formed regarding a specific application.
As a consequence, the adoption of the publish-subscribe paradigm 
meets the R1 requirement, concerning the need for events and the 
R2 requirement pertaining to attribute addressing. In addition it 
also meets the R5 requirement related to energy saving.
4.2

Constraint and Query Languages
Constraint and Query languages are used to filter collecting data 
by specifying restrictions in the values and preferences of the 
attributes. A statement in these languages is a string  that 
represents an expression.
The constraint language only includes constants (values) and 
operations over values. Values and operations with integer, float, 
boolean and strings are allowed. The language admits several 
types of expressions.
·

The expressions can be comparative:  == (equality), != 
(inequality), &gt;, &gt;=, &lt;, &lt;=. For instance, Temperature &lt; 36.6 
means to consider data where the attribute Temperature is 
less than 36.6 degrees Celsius.
·

The expressions can be boolean: AND, OR, NOT. For 
example, Temperature &gt;= 26.6 AND Temperature &lt; = 36.6 
implies to consider data where the value of the attribute 
Temperature is between 26.6 and 36.6 degrees Celsius.
·

The expressions can be numerical with the mathematical 
operators + (addition), - (subtraction), * (multiplication) and 
/ (division).
The query language has its syntax based on a subgroup of the 
conditional expression syntax SQL92 [10].  It is an extension of 
the constraints language with new functions.  This new language 
embodies identifiers that can hold a constant value. A mapping 
between identifiers and values is required. In the evaluation of an 
expression, the occurrence of an identifier is replaced by its 
associated value. The addition of new operators (between, like, in, 
is, escape) allows submitting queries similar to those used in 
databases compliant with SQL92. For example, queries of the 
type -- Temperature between 26.6 and 36.6 -- are possible.
The constraint and query languages are intended to ease the work 
programming of online applications. This type of application 
access the information sent in real-time by the sensor nodes. 
Thus, it completes the attendance of the R1 requirement on the 
way of operation for query.
4.3

Application Filters
Filters are application specific software  modules that deal with 
diffusion and data processing [11].  Filters are provided before 
deploying a sensor network. Each filter is specified using a list of 
attributes to make possible the matching with the incoming data.
Filters are used to make internal aggregation of data, collaborative 
signals processing, caching and tasks that control the data flow in 
the sensor network [11]. In SensorBus, filters will be used to limit 
the data flow in the network.  A filter can be designed to restrict 
the range of values of a determined attribute, for example the 
application requires that the attribute Temperature has values 
ranging between 20 and 30 degrees Celsius, the values outside 
this particular range are of no interest. The filtering process 
discards the unnecessary data reducing the flow between the 
nodes.  This decrease reduces the consumption of energy in 
sensor nodes. Thus, it completes the attendance of the R5 
requirement about the energy saving of the sensor nodes.
4.4

Design Patterns
Design patterns are descriptions of objects and communicating 
classes that are customized to solve a general design problem 
within a particular context [12]. It describes commonly recurring 
design architectures extracted from the experience of one or more 
domain specialists. A design pattern names, abstracts, and 
identifies the key aspects of a common design structure that make 
it useful for creating a reusable object-oriented design [12]. We 
make use of design patterns in SensorBus project and the types 
we have utilized are as follows:
5
The  Observer pattern: Defines a one-to-many dependency 
between objects so that when one object changes state, all of its 
dependents are notified and updated automatically. We utilize this 
pattern to implement the publish-subscribe mechanism.
The Interpreter pattern: Defines a representation for its grammar 
along with an interpreter that uses the representation to interpret 
sentences in the language. We make use of this pattern to 
implement the constraint and query language.
The Facade pattern: Defines a unified (higher-level) interface to 
a set of interfaces in a subsystem that makes the subsystem easier 
to use. We use this pattern to implement the middleware high-level
primitives which will be available to developers.
The Mediator pattern: Defines an object that encapsulates how a 
set of objects interact. Mediator promotes loose coupling by 
keeping objects from referring to each other explicitly, and it lets 
you vary their interaction independently.
The  Adapter pattern: Converts the interface of a class into 
another interface clients expect. Adapter lets classes work 
together that couldn't otherwise because of incompatible 
interfaces.
The  Router pattern: Decouples multiple sources of input from 
multiple sources of output to route data correctly without 
blocking.
The design patterns Mediator,  Adapter e Router are utilized to 
implement the middleware message bus. The exchangeable 
communication mechanism was written using these patterns. This 
mechanism allows the utilization of any routing protocol designed 
for sensor networks meeting as a result the requirements R2, R3 
and R4.
SENSORBUS ARCHITECTURE
SensorBus is comprised of the following elements: an application 
service, a message service and a context service as shown in 
Figure 1.








Figure 1. Middleware architecture.
The following sections present each one of the services mentioned 
by the means of UML (Unified Modeling Language) component 
diagrams [13].
5.1

Application Service
The application service provides Application Programming 
Interface (API) which simplifies application development. This 
service is comprised of three components as shown in Figure 2:

Figure 2. Application Service Architecture.
DataBus: component providing a set of operations relating to bus 
communication for consumers and producers. These operations 
include: Announcement of data item (producer); to find a data 
item (consumer); Announcement of data change (consumer); 
Exclude data item (producer).
Filter: component providing a set of operations relating to data 
filtering.
Language: component that implements the commands and the 
constraint and query language interpreter.
5.2

Message Service
Message service is responsible for providing communication and 
coordination for the distributed components, abstracting the 
developer from these issues. This service also comprises three 
components as is shown in figure 3:

Figure 3. Message Service Architecture.
Channel: Component designed to deal with the specific transport 
implementations. Each instance of Channel represents a simple 
system channel. The component Channel maintains the global 
state information about the availability of channels and is also 
responsible for exchanging channel's messages to the transport 
implementation and vice versa.
Transport: The communication among the nodes is made through 
a specific transport implementation such as sockets. Each 
transport implementation communicates through a channel with a 
message exchange server called Sinker. All transport 
implementations have a common interface which is called 
ITransport.
Sinker: Component responsible for routing messages among 
instances of transport implementation, each instance 
corresponding to an instance of Channel.
Channel
IChannel
Sinker
Transport
ITransport
Filter
DataBus
IDataBus
Language
ILanguage
NOS - JVM/KVM
Application/User
Application Service
Message
Context Service
6
5.3

Context Service
Inherently, an application running on a wireless sensor network 
needs to capture information from the execution context, for 
example, battery level, memory availability, bandwidth, location, 
application specific information such as temperature and pressure, 
etc. The middleware gets this information by interacting with 
several heterogeneous sensors; for example, the level of energy 
remaining on batteries can be obtained by executing an operating 
system primitive, location can be acquired from various 
communications technology such as GPS, infrared and RF. This 
work does not take into consideration how the context sensing is 
executed; it is assumed that each sensor provides an interface so 
the middleware can use it to get the value of the resource of 
interest.
The context service manages the heterogeneous sensors that 
collect information from the environment. For each resource the 
middleware manages, there is an adapter that interacts with the 
physical sensor, processes its information thus obtaining the 
information demanded by the application. Only resource adapters 
that are necessary to the running application will be loaded to 
avoid unnecessary spending of the node's scarce computing 
power. Figure 4 shows an energy adapter interacting with an 
energy sensor (an operating system primitive, in this example).

Figure 4. Context Service Architecture.

MIDDLEWARE ARCHITECTURE EXAMPLE
Figure 5 shows the sensor network communication architecture. 
Each node in the field has the ability to collect data and send it to 
the next sink node. The sink node can be a mobile node acting as 
a data source or a fixed host computer (a PC). The user node 
connects with the sink node through a conventional wireless LAN 
(e.g. IEEE 802.11x).


Figure 5. Communication Architecture.
The services and components of SensorBus are distributed in 
three distinct types of sensor nodes. The components DataBus, 
Language, Channel and Transport are in the user node. The 
Sinker component is in the sink node. The sensor nodes contains 
the Channel and Transport components while filter component 
and context service will only be loaded if the application requires 
energy management and other resources such as memory and 
bandwidth.
The development of an application using SensorBus consists in 
coding the parts for the producer and consumer. The consumer 
code runs in the user machine while the producer code runs in 
sensor nodes. The minimum steps required for the use of 
SensorBus are as follows:
1.

Create a new DataBus instance. A new transport 
implementation is created by identifying a specific Sinker;
2.

Instantiate a producer or a consumer;
3.

Instantiate a "Channel" entity;
4.

Register the just created producer or consumer for the 
channel; and
5.

The producer generates data items and places them into 
Channel while the consumer finds and "crunches" those data.
SensorBus offers other functions that might be implemented, such 
as listing the available channels, adding new channels and stop 
receiving new channels.
The producer sensor code has to be implemented before setup of 
the network. If it is not possible to retrieve the sensor for 
maintenance, the attributes of the data sent will always be the 
same. To overcome this obstacle the constraint and query 
languages are used to add new queries that had not been initially 
foreseen. These queries are sent by the interested consumer 
(client) in the form of messages.

Figure 6. Middleware architecture example.
WLAN
Sink node
User node
Sensor field
Sensor nodes

EnergySensor
EnergyAdapter
EnergyEvent
IEvent
IAdapter
Data
&lt;&lt;user&gt;&gt;
&lt;&lt;application&gt;&gt;
Language
Filter
Channel
Transport
Sinker
Battery
Battery
Temperature
Sensor
IAdapter
Application
Service
Message
Service
Context Service
Temperature
Adapter
7
Filters are as well implemented in nodes. Soon after a producer is 
instantiated, a filter is also instantiated and registered for a new 
channel.
Figure 6 shows the components that may be active in a given 
moment. Although most of the components are the same for a 
given application, different settings may occur on the context 
service. The figure shows only two adapters running at the same 
time and interacting with its associated sensors (temperature and 
battery). Distinct sensors can be used depending on the physical 
measurement to be taken and the type of computing resource to be 
managed.

IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES
The testbed setup for SensorBus evaluation consists of Intel-based 
equipment equipped with 802.11b cards. The sink node is a 
centrino-based Dell Lattitude notebook, the sensor nodes are 
deployed in handheld computers HP iPAQ running Linux 
operating system on Intel XScale processor. The sensor nodes are 
placed at various locations in the Electrical Engineering 
Department Building (about 40m×60m) at Federal University of 
Pará. Linksys Wireless LAN cards are used working in the DCF 
mode with a channel bandwidth of 11Mbps. In the building, there 
is interference from IEEE 802.11 access points (AP) and other 
electronic devices.
7.1

Working Prototype
For our working prototype, we have chosen the Java platform as 
our implementation technology because of its broad installed base 
and to ensure compatibility with most hardware platforms. The 
KVM (Kilobyte Virtual Machine) [14] is being used due to its 
freely available source-code and its designed targeting towards 
small limited-resources devices similar to the sensor nodes of this 
work. The SensorBus API and its constraint and query language 
are being coded as Java classes. Due to issues regarding 
efficiency, the code that will run in sensor nodes is being 
implemented as native code.
An object serialization mechanism was implemented because 
KVM does not support this facility. Serialization mechanism 
converts an object and its state into a byte stream allowing this 
object to be moved over a network or persisted in a local file 
system. Object recovery is performed through another mechanism 
called deserialization. Other Java technologies as J2SE ­ Java 2 
Standard Edition utilize this kind of facility to support the 
encoding of objects into a stream of bytes while protecting private 
and transient data. Serialization is used in distributed 
programming through sockets or Remote Method Invocation 
(RMI). We have coded a semiautomatic serialization in order to 
store the state of the objects. To achieve this, we had to define a 
series of new interfaces and classes.
One of the most critical problems with serialization  is security 
because when an object is converted in a byte stream any attacker 
equipped with properly sniffer software can intercept and access 
it; in this case even private attributes can be accessed without any 
special technique. To tackle this issue, secure protocols as HTTPS 
(Secure HyperText Transport Protocol) or serialization encryption 
can be used.
7.2

Simulation
Having implemented this working prototype, this research now 
intends to do performance evaluation by using the very well 
known tool NS ­ Network Simulator [15]. We plan to integrate 
the SensorBus middleware with NS in a way that the sensor nodes 
will plug into NS in order to provide real data for feeding the 
simulator model. To do so, an execution environment will be 
added to the simulator. This environment will run as a sole UNIX 
process and will be plugged to the NS protocol stack through a 
sensor agent.
The sensor agent is actually a NS agent responsible for 
connecting an execution environment instance to the NS protocol 
stack. The communication takes place through a pair of UDP 
(User Datagram Protocol) sockets. Incoming packets are 
encapsulated in NS packets and transmitted through the simulated 
sensor network. Parameters that need to be known to the protocol 
stack are placed in the header of the NS packet while the rest of 
the information is added to the payload of the NS packet. 
Similarly, outgoing packets are retrieved from the NS packets and 
sent to the execution environment to be processed.
It will be necessary to provide a mechanism to synchronize the 
execution and simulation environment since they run in distinct 
times. Simulations will be performed using a NS Directed 
Diffusion  transport implementation [5] for wireless sensor 
networks.

RELATED WORKS
In [16] an overall description of the challenges involving 
middleware for wireless sensor networks is presented focusing on 
the restraint aspects of these systems.
Cougar [17] and SINA [18], Sensor Information Networking 
Architecture, provide a distributed database interface for wireless 
sensor networks that use a query language to allow applications to 
run monitoring functions. Cougar manages the power by 
distributing the query among the sensor nodes to minimize energy 
required in data gathering. SINA adds low-level mechanisms to 
build hierarchical clustering of sensors aiming at efficient data 
aggregation and also provides protocols which limit the 
rebroadcast of similar information to neighbor's nodes.
AutoSec [19], Automatic Service Composition, manages resources 
of the sensor networks by providing access control for 
applications to ensure quality of service. This approach is very 
similar to conventional middleware technology but the techniques 
to collect resource information are suitable for wireless sensor 
networks.
DSWare [20] provides service abstraction similar to AutoSec, but 
instead of having a service provided by only one sensor node, the 
service is supplied by a group of neighbor's nodes.
Smart Messages Project [21] proposes a distributed computing 
model based on migration of executing units. Smart messages are 
migratory units containing data and code. The goal of Smart 
Messages Project is to develop a computing model and systems 
architecture to Networks Embedded Systems (NES).
EnviroTrack [22] is a middleware for object-based distributed 
systems that lifts the abstraction level for programming
8
environmental monitoring applications. It contains mechanisms 
that abstract groups of sensors into logical objects.
Impala [23] exploits mobile code techniques to alter the 
middleware's functionality running on a sensor node. The key to 
energy-efficient management in Impala is that applications are as 
modular and concise as possible so little changes demands fewer 
energy resources.
MiLAN [24] was developed to allow dynamic network setup to 
meet the applications performance requirements. The applications 
represent its requests by the means of specialized graphics which 
incorporates changes due to applications needs.
In [25], an adaptative middleware is proposed to explore the 
commitment between resource spending and quality during 
information collecting. The main goal is to decrease the 
transmissions among sensor nodes without compromising the 
overall result.
Every one of those middleware proposals is designed to make 
efficient use of wireless sensor networks; they do not support free 
exchange of the transport mechanism. More specifically, most of 
those approaches are not capable of altering the routing protocol 
to meet different application requirements.

CONCLUDING REMARKS
As was demonstrated, application development is closely related 
to wireless sensor network design. Each communication 
mechanism provided by a determined routing protocol is 
application specific, e.g. it is designed to meet some application 
specific requirement. We suggest that the utility of the 
middleware for wireless sensor networks is supported by 
decoupling the communication mechanism from the programming 
interfaces and also by capability of using more than one 
communication mechanism to address the requirements of larger 
number of applications. We have shown that SensorBus, a sensor 
network middleware that we are developing to meet these goals, 
can aid the development of different types of sensor network 
applications.

REFERENCES
[1]

P. Rentala, R. Musunuri, S. Gandham and U. Saxena, Survey 
on Sensor Networks, Technical Report, University of Texas, 
Dept. of Computer Science, 2002.
[2]

G. -C. Roman, A. L. Murphy, and G. P. Picco, Software 
Engineering for Mobility: A Roadmap. In The Future of 
Software Engineering ­ 22
nd
Int. Conf. On Software
Engineering (ICSE2000), pages 243-258. ACM Press, May 
2000.
[3]

J. Pottie and W. J. Kaiser, Embedding the internet wireless 
integrated network sensors, Communications of the ACM, 
vol. 43, no. 5, pp. 51-58, May 2000.
[4]

W. Heinzelman, A. Chandrakasan and H. Balakrishnan, 
Energy-efficient communication protocol for wireless micro 
sensor networks. Proceedings of the 33
rd
Annual Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences, Pages 3005-3014
, 2000.
[5]

C. Intanagonwiwat, R. Govindan, and D. Estrin, Directed 
diffusion: A scalable and robust communication paradigm 
for sensor networks. In Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE 
International Conference on Mobile Computing and 
Networking, pages 56-67, Boston, MA, USA, Aug. 2000.
[6]

T. Sameer, N. B. Abu-Ghazaleh and Heinzelman W. A 
Taxonomy of Wireless Micro-Sensor Network Models. 
Mobile Computing and Communications Review, Volume 1, 
Number 2, 2003.
[7]

Guia de Chefe ­ Brazilian Institute of Environment 
(IBAMA) 
http://www2.ibama.gov.br/unidades/guiadechefe/guia/t-1corpo
.htm. December, 2004.
[8]

B. C. Arrue, A. Ollero e J. R. M. de DIOS, An intelligent 
system for false alarm reduction in infrared forest-fire 
detection, IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 15, pp. 64-73, 2000.
[9]

G. Couloris, J. Dollimore, e T. Kindberg Distributed 
Systems: Concepts and Design. Third edition. Addison-Wesley
, 2001.
[10]

SQL92 ­ Database Language SQL ­ July 30, 1992. 
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/afs/andrew.cmu.edu/usr/shadow/www
/sql/sql1992.txt
[11]

J. Heidemann, F. Silva, C. Intanagonwiwat, R. Govindan, D. 
Estrin and D. Ganesan. Building efficient wireless sensor 
networks with low-level naming. In Proceedings of the 
Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, pages 146-159, 
Chateau Lake Louise, Banff, Alberta, Canada, October 2001.
[12]

E. Gamma, R. Helm, R. Johnson e J. Vlissides, Design 
Patterns. Addison-Wesley, 1995.
[13]

J. Rumbaugh, I. Jacobson and G. Booch. The Unified 
Modeling Language Reference Manual. Addison Wesley, 
1998.
[14]

KVM ­ The K Virtual Machine Specification.
http://java.sun.com/products/kvm/
, August 2004.
[15]

UCB/LBNL/VINT Network Simulator ­ NS (Version 2). 
http//www.isi.edu./nsnam/ns/, August 2004.
[16]

K. Römer, O. Kasten and F. Mattern. Middleware 
Challenges for Wireless Sensor Networks. Mobile 
Computing and Communications Review, volume 6, number 
2, 2002.
[17]

P. Bonnet, J. Gehrke and P. Seshadri. Querying the Physycal 
World.  IEEE Personal Communication, 7:10-15, October 
2000.
[18]

C. Srisathapornphat, C. Jaikaeo and C. Shen. Sensor 
Information Networking Architecture, International 
Workshop on Pervasive Computing (IWPC00), Toronto 
Canada, August 2000.
[19]

Q. Han and N. Venkatasubramanian. AutoSec: An integrated 
middleware framework for dynamic service brokering. IEEE 
Distributed Systems Online, 2(7), 2001.
9
[20]

S. Li, S. Son, and J. Stankovic. Event detection services 
using data service middleware in distributed sensor 
networks. In Proceedings of the 2
nd
International Workshop
on Information Processing in Sensor Networks, April 2003.
[21]

Smart Messages project. March, 2003. 
http://discolab.rutgers.edu/sm.
[22]

T. Abdelzaher, B. Blum, Q. Cao, D. Evans, J. George, S. 
George, T. He, L. Luo, S. Son, R. Stoleru, J. Stankovic and 
A. Wood. EnviroTrack: Towards an Environmental 
Computing Paradigm for Distributed Sensor Networks. 
Technical report, Department of Computer Science, 
University of Virginia, 2003.
[23]

T. Liu and M. Martonosi. Impala: A middleware system for 
managing autonomic, parallel sensor systems. In ACM 
SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel 
Programming (PPoPP´03), June 2003
[24]

A. Murphy and W. Heinzelman, MiLan: Middleware linking 
applications and networks, Technical Report TR-795, 
University of Rochester, 2002.
[25]

X. Yu, K. Niyogi, S. Mehrotra and N. Venkatasubramanian, 
Adaptive middleware for distributed sensor networks, IEEE 
Distributed Systems Online, May 2003.
