Leo: A System for Cost Effective 3D Shaded Graphics
ABSTRACT
A physically compact, low cost, high performance 3D graphics accelerator
is presented. It supports shaded rendering of triangles and
antialiased lines into a double-buffered 24-bit true color frame buffer
with a 24-bit Z-buffer. Nearly the only chips used besides standard
memory parts are 11 ASICs (of four types). Special geometry
data reformatting hardware on one ASIC greatly speeds and simplifies
the data input pipeline. Floating-point performance is enhanced
by another ASIC: a custom graphics microprocessor, with specialized
graphics instructions and features. Screen primitive rasterization
is carried out in parallel by five drawing ASICs, employing a
new partitioning of the back-end rendering task. For typical rendering
cases, the only system performance bottleneck is that intrinsically
imposed by VRAM.
Categories and Subject Descriptors:
C.1.2 [Processor Architectures
]: Multiprocessors; I.3.1 [Computer Graphics]: Hardware
Architecture; I.3.3 [Computer Graphics]: Picture/Image Generation
Display algorithms; I.3.7 [Computer Graphics]: Three Dimension-al
Graphics and Realism.
INTRODUCTION
To expand the role of 3D graphics in the mainstream computer industry
, cost effective, physically small, usable performance 3D
shaded graphics architectures must be developed. For such systems,
new features and sheer performance at any price can no longer be
the driving force behind the architecture; instead, the focus must be
on affordable desktop systems.
The historical approach to achieving low cost in 3D graphics systems
has been to compromise both performance and image quality.
But now, falling memory component prices are bringing nearly ideal
frame buffers into the price range of the volume market: double
buffered 24-bit color with a 24-bit Z-buffer. The challenge is to drive
these memory chips at their maximum rate with a minimum of supporting
rendering chips, keeping the total system cost and physical
size to an absolute minimum. To achieve this, graphics architectures
must be repartitioned to reduce chip count and internal bus sizes,
while still supporting existing 2D and 3D functionality.
This paper describes a new 3D graphics system, Leo, designed to
these philosophies. For typical cases, Leo's only performance limit
is that intrinsically imposed by VRAM. This was achieved by a
combination of new architectural techniques and advances in VLSI
technology. The result is a system without performance or image
quality compromises, at an affordable cost and small physical size.
The Leo board set is about the size of one and a half paperback novels
; the complete workstation is slightly larger than two copies of
Foley and Van Dam [7]. Leo supports both the traditional requirements
of the 2D X window system and the needs of 3D rendering:
shaded triangles, antialiased vectors, etc.
ARCHITECTURAL ALTERNATIVES
A generic pipeline for 3D shaded graphics is shown in Figure 1. ([7]
Chapter 18 is a good overview of 3D graphics hardware pipeline issues
.) This pipeline is truly generic, as at the top level nearly every
commercial 3D graphics accelerator fits this abstraction. Where individual
systems differ is in the partitioning of this rendering pipeline
, especially in how they employ parallelism. Two major areas
have been subject to separate optimization: the floating-point intensive
initial stages of processing up to, and many times including,
primitive set-up; and the drawing-intensive operation of generating
pixels within a primitive and Z-buffering them into the frame buffer.
For low end accelerators, only portions of the pixel drawing stages
of the pipeline are in hardware; the floating-point intensive parts of
the pipe are processed by the host in software. As general purpose
processors increase in floating-point power, such systems are starting
to support interesting rendering rates, while minimizing cost
[8]. But, beyond some limit, support of higher performance requires
dedicated hardware for the entire pipeline.
There are several choices available for partitioning the floating-point
intensive stages. Historically, older systems performed these
tasks in a serial fashion [2]. In time though, breaking the pipe into
more pieces for more parallelism (and thus performance) meant
that each section was devoting more and more of its time to I/O
overhead rather than to real work. Also, computational variance
meant that many portions of the pipe would commonly be idle
while others were overloaded. This led to the data parallel designs
of most recent 3D graphics architectures [12].
Leo: A System for Cost Effective
3D Shaded Graphics
Michael F Deering, Scott R Nelson
Sun Microsystems Computer Corporation

Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted
provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct  
commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the
publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by
permission of the Association for Computing Machinery.  To copy
otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific permission. 
©1993  ACM-0-89791-601-8/93/008/0015...$1.50

Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted
provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct  
commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the
publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by
permission of the Association for Computing Machinery.  To copy
otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific permission. 
©1993  ACM-0-89791-601-8/93/008...$1.50

101
Here the concept is that multiple parallel computation units can
each process the entire floating-point intensive task, working in parallel
on different parts of the scene to be rendered. This allows each
pipe to be given a large task to chew on, minimizing handshake
overhead. But now there is a different load balancing problem. If
one pipe has an extra large task, the other parallel pipes may go idle
waiting for their slowest peer, if the common requirement of in-order
execution of tasks is to be maintained. Minor load imbalances
can be averaged out by adding FIFO buffers to the inputs and outputs
of the parallel pipes. Limiting the maximum size of task given
to any one pipe also limits the maximum imbalance, at the expense
of further fragmenting the tasks and inducing additional overhead.
But the most severe performance bottleneck lies in the pixel drawing
back-end. The most fundamental constraint on 3D computer
graphics architecture over the last ten years has been the memory
chips that comprise the frame buffer. Several research systems have
attempted to avoid this bottleneck by various techniques [10][4][8],
but all commercial workstation systems use conventional Z-buffer
rendering algorithms into standard VRAMs or DRAMs. How this
RAM is organized is an important defining feature of any high performance
rendering system.
LEO OVERVIEW
Figure 2 is a diagram of the Leo system. This figure is not just a
block diagram; it is also a chip level diagram, as every chip in the
system is shown in this diagram. All input data and window system
interactions enter through the LeoCommand chip. Geometry data is
reformatted in this chip before being distributed to the array of LeoFloat
chips below. The LeoFloat chips are microcoded specialized
DSP-like processors that tackle the floating-point intensive stages
of the rendering pipeline. The LeoDraw chips handle all screen
space pixel rendering and are directly connected to the frame buffer
RAM chips. LeoCross handles the back-end color look-up tables,
double buffering, and video timing, passing the final digital pixel
values to the RAMDAC.
Leo
Command
Leo
Float
Leo
Draw
Leo
Cross
RAM
DAC
Clock
Generator
Boot
PROM
SRAM
SRAM
SRAM
SRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
DRAM
DRAM
Leo
Draw
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
DRAM
DRAM
Leo
Draw
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
DRAM
DRAM
Leo
Draw
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
DRAM
DRAM
Leo
Draw
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
VRAM
DRAM
DRAM
Leo
Float
SRAM
SRAM
SRAM
SRAM
Leo
Float
SRAM
SRAM
SRAM
SRAM
Leo
Float
SRAM
SRAM
SRAM
SRAM
CF Bus
CD Bus
CX Bus (Subset of CD Bus)
Figure 2: The Leo Block Diagram. Every chip in the system is
represented in this diagram.
Video Output
SBus
Data Input
Transformation
Clip Test
Face Determination
Lighting
Clip (if needed)
Perspective Divide
Screen Space
  Conversion
Set Up for
Incremental Render
Edge-Walk
Span-Interpolate
Z-Buffered Blend
VRAM Frame Buffer
Double Buffered MUX
 Output Lookup Table
Digital to Analog
    Conversion
Figure 1: Generic 3D Graphics Pipeline
Drawing
Floating-point
Intensive Functions
Intensive Functions
CD Bus
102
The development of the Leo architecture started with the constraints
imposed by contemporary VRAM technology. As will be
derived in the LeoDraw section below, these constraints led to the
partitioning of the VRAM controlling LeoDraw chips, and set a
maximum back-end rendering rate. This rate in turn set the performance
goal for LeoFloat, as well as the data input bandwidth and
processing rate for LeoCommand. After the initial partitioning of
the rendering pipeline into these chips, each chip was subjected to
additional optimization. Throughput bottlenecks in input geometry
format conversion, floating-point processing, and pixel rendering
were identified and overcome by adding reinforcing hardware to
the appropriate chips.
Leo's floating-point intensive section uses data parallel partitioning
. LeoCommand helps minimize load balancing problems by
breaking down rendering tasks to the smallest isolated primitives:
individual triangles, vectors, dots, portions of pixel rasters, rendering
attributes, etc., at the cost of precluding optimizations for
shared data in triangle strips and polylines. This was considered
acceptable due to the very low average strip length empirically
observed in real applications. The overhead of splitting geometric
data into isolated primitives is minimized by the use of dedicated
hardware for this task. Another benefit of converting all rendering
operations to isolated primitives is that down-stream processing of
primitives is considerably simplified by only needing to focus on
the isolated case.
INPUT PROCESSING LEO COMMAND
Feeding the pipe
Leo supports input of geometry data both as programmed I/O and
through DMA. The host CPU can directly store up to 32 data words
in an internal LeoCommand buffer without expensive read back
testing of input status every few words. This is useful on hosts that
do not support DMA, or when the host must perform format conversions
beyond those supported in hardware. In DMA mode, LeoCommand
employs efficient block transfer protocols on the system
bus to transfer data from system memory to its input buffer, allowing
much higher bandwidth than simple programmed I/O. Virtual
memory pointers to application's geometry arrays are passed directly
to LeoCommand, which converts them to physical memory
addresses without operating system intervention (except when a
page is marked as currently non-resident). This frees the host CPU
to perform other computations during the data transfer. Thus the
DMA can be efficient even for pure immediate-mode applications,
where the geometry is being created on the fly.
Problem: Tower of Babel of input formats
One of the problems modern display systems face is the explosion
of different input formats for similar drawing functions that need to
be supported. Providing optimized microcode for each format
rapidly becomes unwieldy. The host CPU could be used to pretrans-late
the primitive formats, but at high speeds this conversion operation
can itself become a system bottleneck. Because DMA completely
bypasses the host CPU, LeoCommand includes a programmable
format conversion unit in the geometry data pipeline. This
reformatter is considerably less complex than a general purpose
CPU, but can handle the most commonly used input formats, and at
very high speeds.
The geometry reformatting subsystem allows several orthogonal
operations to be applied to input data. This geometric input data is
abstracted as a stream of vertex packets. Each vertex packet may
contain any combination of vertex position, vertex normal, vertex
color, facet normal, facet color, texture map coordinates, pick IDs,
headers, and other information. One conversion supports arbitrary
re-ordering of data within a vertex, allowing a standardized element
order after reformatting. Another operation supports the conversion
of multiple numeric formats to 32-bit IEEE floating-point. The
source data can be 8-bit or 16-bit fixed-point, or 32-bit or 64-bit
IEEE floating-point. Additional miscellaneous reformatting allows
the stripping of headers and other fields, the addition of an internally
generated sequential pick ID, and insertion of constants. The
final reformatting stage re-packages vertex packets into complete
isolated geometry primitives (points, lines, triangles). Chaining bits
in vertex headers delineate which vertices form primitives.
Like some other systems, Leo supports a generalized form of triangle
strip (see Figure 3), where vertex header bits within a strip specify
how the incoming vertex should be combined with previous vertices
to form the next triangle. A stack of the last three vertices used
to form a triangle is kept. The three vertices are labeled oldest, middle
, and newest. An incoming vertex of type replace
_oldest causes
the oldest vertex to be replaced by the middle, the middle to be replaced
by the newest, and the incoming vertex becomes the newest.
This corresponds to a PHIGS PLUS triangle strip (sometimes called
a "zig-zag" strip). The replacement type replace
_middle leaves the
oldest vertex unchanged, replaces the middle vertex by the newest,
and the incoming vertex becomes the newest. This corresponds to a
triangle star. The replacement type restart marks the oldest and middle
vertices as invalid, and the incoming vertex becomes the newest.
Generalized triangle strips must always start with this code. A triangle
will be output only when a replacement operation results in three
valid vertices. Restart corresponds to a "move" operation in
polylines, and allows multiple unconnected variable-length triangle
strips to be described by a single data structure passed in by the user,
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
21
1 Restart
  2 RO
  3 RO
  4 RO
  5 RO
  6 RO
  7 Restart
  8 RO
  9 RO
10 RM
11 RM
12 RM
13 RM
14 RM
15 Restart
16 RO
17 RO
18 Restart
19 RO
20 RO
21 RO
22 Restart
23 RO
24 RO
25 RO
26 RO
27 RO
28 RO
29 RM
30 RM
31 RM
32 RM
33 RO
Triangle Strip
Triangle Star
Independent
Triangle
Independent
Quad
Mixed Strip
Figure 3: A Generalized Triangle Strip
Vertex Codes
RO = Replace Oldest
RM = Replace Middle
103
reducing the overhead. The generalized triangle strip's ability to effectively
change from "strip" to "star" mode in the middle of a strip
allows more complex geometry to be represented compactly, and requires
less input data bandwidth. The restart capability allows several
pieces of disconnected geometry to be passed in one DMA operation
. Figure 3 shows a single generalized triangle strip, and the
associated replacement codes. LeoCommand also supports header-less
strips of triangle vertices either as pure strips, pure stars, or pure
independent triangles.
LeoCommand hardware automatically converts generalized triangle
strips into isolated triangles. Triangles are normalized such that
the front face is always defined by a clockwise vertex order after
transformation. To support this, a header bit in each restart defines
the initial face order of each sub-strip, and the vertex order is reversed
after every replace
_oldest. LeoCommand passes each com-pleted
triangle to the next available LeoFloat chip, as indicated by
the input FIFO status that each LeoFloat sends back to LeoCommand
. The order in which triangles have been sent to each
LeoFloat is scoreboarded by LeoCommand, so that processed triangles
are let out of the LeoFloat array in the same order as they entered
. Non-sequential rendering order is also supported, but the
automatic rendering task distribution hardware works so well that
the performance difference is less than 3%. A similar, but less complex
vertex repackaging is supported for polylines and multi-polylines
via a move/draw bit in the vertex packet header.
To save IC pins and PC board complexity, the internal Leo data busses
connecting LeoCommand, LeoFloat, and LeoDraw are 16 bits in
size. When colors, normals, and texture map coefficients are being
transmitted on the CF-bus between LeoCommand and the LeoFloats
, these components are (optionally) compressed from 32-bit
IEEE floating-point into 16-bit fixed point fractions by LeoCommand
, and then automatically reconverted back to 32-bit IEEE
floating-point values by LeoFloat. This quantization does not effect
quality. Color components will eventually end up as 8-bit values in
the frame buffer. For normals, 16-bit (signed) accuracy represents a
resolution of approximately plus or minus an inch at one mile. This
optimization reduces the required data transfer bandwidth by 25%.
FLOATING-POINT PROCESSING LEO FLOAT
After canonical format conversion, the next stages of processing triangles
in a display pipeline are: transformation, clip test, face determination
, lighting, clipping (if required), screen space conversion,
and set-up. These operations are complex enough to require the use
of a general purpose processor.
Use of commercially available DSP (Digital Signal Processing)
chips for this work has two major drawbacks. First, most such processors
require a considerable number of surrounding glue chips,
especially when they are deployed as multi-processors. These glue
chips can easily quadruple the board area dedicated to the DSP
chip, as well as adversely affecting power, heat, cost, and reliability.
Second, few of these chips have been optimized for 3D graphics.
A better solution might be to augment the DSP with a special ASIC
that would replace all of these glue chips. Given the expense of developing
an ASIC, we decided to merge that ASIC with a custom
DSP core optimized for graphics.
The resulting chip was LeoFloat. LeoFloat combines a 32-bit mi-crocodable
floating-point core with concurrent input and output
packet communication subsystems (see Figure 4
.
), similar to the approach
of [3]. The only support chips required are four SRAM chips
for external microcode store. A number of specialized graphics instructions
and features make LeoFloat different from existing DSP
processors. Each individual feature only makes a modest incremen-tal
contribution to performance, and indeed many have appeared in
other designs. What is novel about LeoFloat is the combination of
features, whose cumulative effect leads to impressive overall system
performance. The following sections describe some of the
more important special graphics instructions and features.
Double buffered asynchronous I/O register files.
All input and
output commands are packaged up by separate I/O packet hardware.
Variable length packets of up to 32 32-bit words are automatically
written into (or out of) on-chip double-buffered register files (the I
and O registers). These are mapped directly into microcode register
space. Special instructions allow complete packets to be requested,
relinquished, or queued for transmission in one instruction cycle.
Enough internal registers.
Most commercial DSP chips support a
very small number of internal fast registers, certainly much smaller
than the data needed by the inner loops of most 3D pipeline algorithms
. They attempt to make up for this with on-chip SRAM or
data caches, but typically SRAMs are not multi-ported and the
caches not user-schedulable. We cheated with LeoFloat. We first
wrote the code for the largest important inner loop (triangles),
counted how many registers were needed (288), and built that many
into the chip.
Parallel internal function units
. The floating-point core functions
(32-bit IEEE format) include multiply, ALU, reciprocal, and integer
operations, all of which can often be executed in parallel. It is
particularly important that the floating-point reciprocal operation
not tie up the multiply and add units, so that perspective or slope
calculations can proceed in parallel with the rest of geometric processing
. Less frequently used reciprocal square root hardware is
shared with the integer function unit.
Put all non-critical algorithms on the host.
We avoided the necessity
of building a high level language compiler (and support instructions
) for LeoFloat by moving any code not worth hand coding in
microcode to the host processor. The result is a small, clean kernel
of graphics routines in microcode. (A fairly powerful macro-assembler
with a `C'-like syntax was built to support the hand coding.)
Software pipeline scheduling.
One of the most complex parts of
modern CPUs to design and debug is their scoreboard section,
which schedules the execution of instructions across multiple steps
in time and function units, presenting the programmer with the
Figure 4: LeoFloat arithmetic function units, registers and data paths.
I0 -I31
I0'-I31'
*
*
+
+
+
IALU
1/X
FALU
FMULT
Input from off-chip
Off-chip output
P0 -P31
P32-P63
P64-P91
R0 -R31
R32-R63
O0 -O31
O0'-O31'
104
illusion that individual instructions are executed in one shot. LeoFloat
avoided all this hardware by using more direct control fields,
like horizontal microprogrammable machines, and leaving it to the
assembler (and occasionally the programmer) to skew one logical
instruction across several physical instructions.
Special clip condition codes & clip branch.
For clip testing we
employ a modified Sutherland-Hodgman algorithm, which first
computes a vector of clip condition bits. LeoFloat has a clip test instruction
that computes these bits two at a time, shifting them into
a special clip-bits register. After the bits have been computed, special
branch instructions decode these bits into the appropriate case:
clip rejected, clip accepted, single edge clip (six cases), or needs
general clipping. There are separate branch instructions for triangles
and vectors. (A similar approach was taken in [9].) The branch
instructions allow multiple other conditions to be checked at the
same time, including backfacing and model clipping.
Register Y sort instruction.
The first step of the algorithm we used
for setting up triangles for scan conversion sorts the three triangle
vertices in ascending Y order. On a conventional processor this requires
either moving a lot of data, always referring to vertex data
through indirect pointers, or replicating the set-up code for all six
possible permutations of triangle vertex order. LeoFloat has a special
instruction that takes the results of the last three comparisons and reorders
part of the R register file to place vertices in sorted order.
Miscellaneous.
LeoFloat contains many performance features tra-ditionally
found on DSP chips, including an internal subroutine
stack, block load/store SRAM, and integer functions. Also there is
a "kitchen sink" instruction that initiates multiple housekeeping
functions in one instruction, such as "transmit current output packet
(if not clip pending), request new input packet, extract op-code and
dispatch to next task."
Code results: equivalent to 150 megaflop DSP.
Each 25 MHz
LeoFloat processes the benchmark isolated triangle (including clip-test
and set-up) in 379 clocks. (With a few exceptions, microcode
instructions issue at a rate of one per clock tick.) The same graphics
algorithm was tightly coded on several RISC processors and DSP
chips (SPARC, i860, C30, etc.), and typically took on the order of
1100 clocks. Thus the 379 LeoFloat instruction at 25 MHz do the
equivalent work of a traditional DSP chip running at 75 MHz (even
though there are only 54 megaflops of hardware). Of course these
numbers only hold for triangles and vectors, but that's most of what
LeoFloat does. Four LeoFloats assure that floating-point processing
is not the bottleneck for 100-pixel isolated, lighted triangles.
SCREEN SPACE RENDERING: LEO DRAW
VRAM limits
Commercial VRAM chips represent a fundamental constraint on
the possible pixel rendering performance of Leo's class of graphics
accelerator. The goal of the Leo architecture was to ensure to the
greatest extent possible that this was the only performance limit for
typical rendering operations.
The fundamental memory transaction for Z-buffered rendering
algorithms is a conditional read-modify-write cycle. Given an XY
address and a computed RGBZ value, the old Z value at the XY address
is first read, and then if the computed Z is in front of the old
Z, the computed RGBZ value is written into the memory. Such
transactions can be mapped to allowable VRAM control signals in
many different ways: reads and writes may be batched, Z may be
read out through the video port, etc.
VRAM chips constrain system rendering performance in two ways.
First, they impose a minimum cycle time per RAM bank for the Z-buffered
read-modify-write cycle. Figure 5 is a plot of this cycle
time (when in "page" mode) and its changes over a half-decade
period. VRAMs also constrain the ways in which a frame buffer can
be partitioned into independently addressable banks. Throughout
the five year period in Figure 5, three generations of VRAM technology
have been organized as 256K by 4, 8, and 16-bit memories. For
contemporary display resolutions of 1280
×
1024, the chips comprising
a minimum frame buffer can be organized into no more than
five separately-addressed interleave banks. Combining this information
, a theoretical maximum rendering speed for a primitive can be
computed. The second line in Figure 5 is the corresponding performance
for rendering 100-pixel Z-buffered triangles, including the
overhead for entering page mode, content refresh, and video shift
register transfers (video refresh). Higher rendering rates are only
possible if additional redundant memory chips are added, allowing
for higher interleaving factors, at the price of increased system cost.
Even supporting five parallel interleaves has a cost: at least 305
memory interface pins (five banks of (24 RGB + 24 Z + 13 address/
control)) are required, more pins than it is currently possible to dedicate
to a memory interface on one chip. Some systems have used
external buffer chips, but on a minimum cost and board area system
, this costs almost as much as additional custom chips. Thus, on
the Leo system we opted for five separate VRAM control chips
(LeoDraws).
Triangle scan conversion
Traditional shaded triangle scan conversion has typically been via
a linear pipeline of edge-walking followed by scan interpolation
[12]. There have been several approaches to achieving higher
throughput in rasterization. [2] employed a single edge-walker, but
parallel scan interpolation. [4][10] employed massively parallel
rasterizers. [6] and other recent machines use moderately parallel
rasterizers, with additional logic to merge the pixel rasterization
streams back together.
In the Leo design we chose to broadcast the identical triangle specification
to five parallel rendering chips, each tasked with rendering
only those pixels visible in the local interleave. Each chip performs
its own complete edge-walk and span interpolation of the triangle,
biased by the chip's local interleave. By paying careful attention to
proper mathematical sampling theory for rasterized pixels, the five
90
91
92
93
94
180 ns
160 ns
140 ns
260K
220K
200K
240K
200 ns
100 pixel triangle
theoretical
maximum
render rate
VRAM minimum
Z-buffer RGB
read/modify/write
cycle time (on page)
(off page = 1.5x)
Figure 5: VRAM cycle time and theoretical maximum triangle
rendering rate (for five-way interleaved frame buffers).
VRAM Cycle T
ime
T
riangle Rendering Rate
1 Meg VRAM
2 Meg VRAM
4 Meg
105
chips can act in concert to produce the correct combined rasterized
image. Mathematically, each chip thinks it is rasterizing the triangle
into an image memory with valid pixel centers only every five original
pixels horizontally, with each chip starting off biased one more
pixel to the right.
To obtain the speed benefits of parallel chips, most high performance
graphics systems have split the edge-walk and span-interpolate
functions into separate chips. But an examination of the relative
amounts of data flow between rendering pipeline stages shows that
the overall peak data transfer bandwidth demand occurs between
the edge-walk and span-interpolate sections, induced by long thin
triangles, which commonly occur in tessellated geometry. To minimize
pin counts and PC board bus complexity, Leo decided to replicate
the edge-walking function into each of the five span-interpolation
chips.
One potential drawback of this approach is that the edge-walking
section of each LeoDraw chip will have to advance to the next scan
line up to five times more often than a single rasterization chip
would. Thus LeoDraw's edge-walking circuit was designed to operate
in one single pixel cycle time (160 ns. read-modify-write VRAM
cycle), so it would never hold back scan conversion. Other usual
pipelining techniques were used, such as loading in and buffering
the next triangle to be drawn in parallel with rasterizing the current
triangle. Window clipping, blending, and other pixel post processing
are handled in later pipelined stages.
Line scan conversion
As with triangles, the mathematics of the line rasterization algorithms
were set up to allow distributed rendering of aliased and
antialiased lines and dots, with each LeoDraw chip handling the
1/5 of the frame buffer pixels that it owns. While the Leo system
uses the X11 semantics of Bresenham lines for window system
operations, these produce unacceptable motion artifacts in 3D
wireframe rendering. Therefore, when rendering 3D lines, Leo
employs a high-accuracy DDA algorithm, using 32 bits internally
for sufficient subpixel precision.
At present there is no agreement in the industry on the definition of a
high quality antialiased line. We choose to use the image quality of
vector strokers of years ago as our quality standard, and we tested different
algorithms with end users, many of whom were still using cal-ligraphic
displays. We found users desired algorithms that displayed
no roping, angle sensitivities, short vector artifacts, or end-point artifacts
. We submitted the resulting antialiased line quality test patterns
as a GPC [11] test image. In achieving the desired image quality level
, we determined several properties that a successful line antialias-ing
algorithm must have. First, the lines must have at least three pixels
of width across the minor axis. Two-pixel wide antialiased lines
exhibit serious roping artifacts. Four-pixel wide lines offer no visible
improvement except for lines near 45 degrees. Second, proper endpoint
ramps spread over at least two pixels are necessary both for
seamless line segment joins as well as for isolated line-ends. Third,
proper care must be taken when sampling lines of subpixel length to
maintain proper final intensity. Fourth, intensity or filter adjustments
based on the slope are necessary to avoid artifacts when rotating
wireframe images. To implement all this, we found that we needed at
least four bits of subpixel positional accuracy after cumulative interpolation
error is factored in. That is why we used 32 bits for XY coordinate
accuracy: 12 for pixel location, 4 for subpixel location, and
16 for DDA interpolation error. (The actual error limit is imposed by
the original, user-supplied 32-bit IEEE floating-point data.)
Because of the horizontal interleaving and preferred scan direction,
the X-major and Y-major aliased and antialiased line rasterization
algorithms are not symmetric, so separate optimized algorithms
were employed for each.
Antialiased dots
Empirical testing showed that only three bits of subpixel precision
are necessary for accurate rendering of antialiased dots. For ASIC
implementation, this was most easily accomplished using a brute-force
table lookup of one of 64 precomputed 3
×
3 pixel dot images.
These images are stored in on-chip ROM, and were generated using
a circular symmetric Gaussian filter.
Triangle, line, and dot hardware
Implementation of the triangle and antialiased vector rasterization
algorithms require substantial hardware resources. Triangles need
single pixel cycle edge-walking hardware in parallel with RGBZ
span interpolation hardware. To obtain the desired quality of antialiased
vectors, our algorithms require hardware to apply multiple
waveform shaping functions to every generated pixel. As a result,
the total VLSI area needed for antialiased vectors is nearly as large
as for triangles. To keep the chip die size reasonable, we reformu-lated
both the triangle and antialiased vector algorithms to combine
and reuse the same function units. The only difference is how the
separate sequencers set up the rasterization pipeline.
Per-pixel depth cue
Depth cueing has long been a heavily-used staple of wireframe applications
, but in most modern rendering systems it is an extra time
expense feature, performed on endpoints back in the floating-point
section. We felt that we were architecting Leo not for benchmarks,
but for users, and many wireframe users want to have depth cueing
on all the time. Therefore, we built a parallel hardware depth cue
function unit into each LeoDraw. Each triangle, vector, or dot rendered
by Leo can be optionally depth cued at absolutely no cost in
performance. Another benefit of per-pixel depth cueing is full compliance
with the PHIGS PLUS depth cueing specification. For Leo,
per-pixel depth cueing hardware also simplifies the LeoFloat microcode
, by freeing the LeoFloats from ever having to deal with it.
Picking support
Interactive graphics requires not only the rapid display of geometric
data, but also interaction with that data: the ability to pick a particular
part or primitive within a part. Any pixels drawn within the
bounds of a 3D pick aperture result in a pick hit, causing the current
pick IDs to be automatically DMAed back to host memory.
Window system support
Many otherwise sophisticated 3D display systems become somewhat
befuddled when having to deal simultaneously with 3D rendering
applications and a 2D window system. Modern window systems
on interactive workstations require frequent context switching
of the rendering pipeline state. Some 3D architectures have tried to
minimize the overhead associated with context switching by supporting
multiple 3D contexts in hardware. Leo goes one step further
, maintaining two completely separate pipelines in hardware:
one for traditional 2D window operations; the other for full 3D rendering
. Because the majority of context switch requests are for 2D
window system operations, the need for more complex 3D pipeline
context switching is significantly reduced. The 2D context is much
lighter weight and correspondingly easier to context switch. The
two separate graphics pipelines operate completely in parallel, allowing
simultaneous access by two independent CPUs on a multi-processor
host.
2D functionality abstracts the frame buffer as a 1-bit, 8-bit, or 24-bit
pixel array. Operations include random pixel access, optimized character
cell writes, block clear, block copy, and the usual menagerie of
106
boolean operations, write masks, etc. Vertical block moves are special
cased, as they are typically used in vertical scrolling of text
windows, and can be processed faster than the general block move
because the pixel data does not have to move across LeoDraw chip
interleaves. Rendering into non-rectangular shaped windows is
supported by special clip hardware, resulting in no loss in performance
. A special block clear function allows designated windows
(and their Z-buffers) to be initialized to any given constant in under
200 microseconds. Without this last feature, 30 Hz or faster animation
of non-trivial objects would have been impossible.
7 VIDEO OUTPUT: LEO CROSS
Leo's standard video output format is 1280
×
1024 at 76 Hz refresh
rate, but it also supports other resolutions, including 1152
×
900,
interlaced 640
×
480 RS-170 (NTSC), interlaced 768
×
576 PAL
timing, and 960
×
680 113 Hz field sequential stereo. LeoCross
contains several color look-up tables, supporting multiple pseudo
color maps without color map flashing. The look-up table also supports
two different true color abstractions: 24-bit linear color
(needed by rendering applications), and REC-709 non-linear color
(required by many imaging applications).
Virtual reality support
Stereo output is becoming increasingly important for use in Virtual
Reality applications. Leo's design goals included support for the
Virtual Holographic Workstation system configuration described in
[5]. Leo's stereo resolution was chosen to support square pixels, so
that lines and antialiased lines are displayed properly in stereo, and
standard window system applications can co-exist with stereo. Stereo
can be enabled on a per-window basis (when in stereo mode windows
are effectively quad-buffered). Hooks were included in LeoCross
to support display technologies other than CRT's, that may be
needed for head-mounted virtual reality displays.
8 NURBS AND TEXTURE MAP SUPPORT/b>
One of the advantages to using programmable elements within a
graphics accelerator is that additional complex functionality, such
as NURBS and texture mapping, can be accelerated. Texture mapping
is supported through special LeoFloat microcode and features
of LeoCommand. LeoFloat microcode also includes algorithms to
accelerate dynamic tessellation of trimmed NURBS surfaces. The
dynamic tessellation technique involves reducing trimmed NURBS
surfaces into properly sized triangles according to a display/pixel
space approximation criteria [1]; i.e. the fineness of tessellation is
view dependent. In the past, dynamic tessellation tended to be
mainly useful as a compression technique, to avoid storing all the
flattened triangles from a NURBS surface in memory. Dynamic tessellation
was not viewed as a performance enhancer, for while it
might generate only a third as many triangles as a static tessellation,
the triangles were generated at least an order of magnitude or more
slower than brute force triangle rendering. In addition it had other
problems, such as not handling general trimming. For many cases,
Leo's dynamic tesselator can generate and render triangles only a
small integer multiple slower than prestored triangle rendering,
which for some views, can result in faster overall object rendering.
9 RESULTS
Leo is physically a-two board sandwich, measuring 5.7
×
6.7
×
0.6
inches, that fits in a standard 2S SBus slot. Figure 6 is a photo of the
two boards, separated, showing all the custom ASICs. Figure 7 is a
photo of the complete Leo workstation, next to two of our units of
scale and the board set.
Leo can render 210K 100-pixel isolated, lighted, Gouraud shaded,
Z-buffered, depth cued triangles per second, with one infinite diffuse
and one ambient light source enabled. At 100 pixels, Leo is
still VRAM rendering speed limited; smaller triangles render faster.
Isolated 10-pixel antialiased, constant color, Z-buffered, depth cued
lines (which are actually 12 pixels long due to endpoint ramps, and
three pixels wide) render at a 422K per second rate. Corresponding
aliased lines render at 730K. Aliased and antialiased constant color,
Z-buffered, depth cued dots are clocked at 1100K. 24-bit image rasters
can be loaded onto the screen at a 10M pixel per second rate.
Screen scrolls, block moves, and raster character draws all also
have competitive performance. Figure 8 is a sample of shaded triangle
rendering.
10 SIMULATION
A system as complex as Leo cannot be debugged after the fact. All
the new rendering mathematics were extensively simulated before
being committed to hardware design. As each chip was defined, high,
medium, and low level simulators of its function were written and
continuously used to verify functionality and performance. Complete
images of simulated rendering were generated throughout the
course of the project, from within weeks of its start. As a result, the
window system and complex 3D rendering were up and running on
a complete board set within a week of receiving the first set of chips.
11 CONCLUSIONS
By paying careful attention to the forces that drive both performance
and cost, a physically compact complete 3D shaded graphics
accelerator was created. The focus was not on new rendering features
, but on cost reduction and performance enhancement of the
most useful core of 3D graphics primitives. New parallel algorithms
were developed to allow accurate screen space rendering of
primitives. Judicious use of hardware to perform some key traditional
software functions (such as format conversion and primitive
vertex reassembly) greatly simplified the microcode task. A specialized
floating-point core optimized for the primary task of processing
lines and triangles also supports more general graphics processing
, such as rasters and NURBS. The final system performance
is limited by the only chips not custom designed for Leo: the standard
RAM chips.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank the entire Leo team for their efforts
in producing the system, and Mike Lavelle for help with the paper.

REFERENCES
1.
Abi-Ezzi, Salim, and L. Shirman.
Tessellation of Curved
Surfaces under Highly Varying Transformations. Proc. Euro-graphics
'91 (Vienna, Austria, September 1991), 385-397.
2.
Akeley, Kurt and T. Jermoluk.
High-Performance Polygon
Rendering, Proceedings of SIGGRAPH '88 (Atlanta, GA, Aug
1-5, 1988). In Computer Graphics 22, 4 (July 1988), 239-246.
3.
Anido, M., D. Allerton and E. Zaluska.
MIGS - A Multiprocessor
Image Generation System using RISC-like Micropro-cessors
. Proceedings of CGI '89 (Leeds, UK, June 1989),
Springer Verlag 1990.
4.
Deering, Michael, S. Winner, B. Schediwy, C. Duffy and N.
Hunt.
The Triangle Processor and Normal Vector Shader: A
VLSI system for High Performance Graphics. Proceedings of
SIGGRAPH '88 (Atlanta, GA, Aug 1-5, 1988). In Computer
Graphics 22, 4 (July 1988), 21-30.
107
5.
Deering, Michael.
High Resolution Virtual Reality. Proceedings
of SIGGRAPH '92 (Chicago, IL, July 26-31, 1992). In
Computer Graphics 26, 2 (July 1992), 195-202.
6.
Dunnett, Graham, M. White, P. Lister and R. Grimsdale.
The Image Chip for High Performance 3D Rendering. IEEE
Computer Graphics and Applications 12, 6 (November 1992),
41-52.
7.
Foley, James, A. van Dam, S. Feiner and J Hughes.
Computer
Graphics: Principles and Practice, 2nd ed., Addison-Wesley
, 1990.
8.
Kelley, Michael, S. Winner, K. Gould.
A Scalable Hardware
Render Accelerator using a Modified Scanline Algorithm.
Proceedings of SIGGRAPH '92 (Chicago, IL, July 26-31,
1992). In Computer Graphics 26, 2 (July 1992), 241-248.
9.
Kirk, David, and D. Voorhies.
The Rendering Architecture
of the DN10000VS. Proceedings of SIGGRAPH '90 (Dallas,
TX, August 6-10, 1990). In Computer Graphics 24, 4 (August
1990), 299-307.
10. Molnar, Steven, J. Eyles, J. Poulton.
PixelFlow: High-Speed
Rendering Using Image Composition. Proceedings of SIGGRAPH
'92 (Chicago, IL, July 26-31, 1992). In Computer
Graphics 26, 2 (July 1992), 231-240.
11. Nelson, Scott.
GPC Line Quality Benchmark Test. GPC Test
Suite, NCGA GPC committee 1991.
12. Torborg, John.
A Parallel Processor Architecture for Graphics
Arithmetic Operations. Proceedings of SIGGRAPH '87
(Anaheim, CA, July 27-31, 1987). In Computer Graphics 21,
4 (July 1987), 197-204.
Figure 8: Traffic Jam to Point Reyes. A scene containing 2,322,000 triangles, rendered by Leo Hardware. Sto-chastically
super-sampled 8 times. Models courtesy of Viewpoint Animation Engineering.
Figure 7: The complete SPARCstation ZX workstation, next to two
of our units of scale and the Leo board set.
Figure 6: The two boards, unfolded.
108
