The Use of Mediation and Ontology Technologies for Software Component Information Retrieval
Abstract
Component Based Development aims at constructing software 
through the inter-relationship between pre-existing components. 
However, these components should be bound to a specific 
application domain in order to be effectively reused. Reusable 
domain components and their related documentation are usually 
stored in a great variety of data sources. Thus, a possible solution 
for accessing this information is to use a software layer that 
integrates different component information sources. We present a 
component information integration data layer, based on mediators. 
Through mediators, domain ontology acts as a 
technique/formalism for specifying ontological commitments or 
agreements between component users and providers, enabling 
more accurate software component information search.

INTRODUCTION
Component Based Development (CBD) [1] aims at constructing 
software through the inter-relationship between pre-existing 
components, thus reducing the complexity, as well as the cost of 
software development, through the reuse of exhaustively tested 
components. Building new solutions by combining components 
should improve quality and support rapid development, leading to 
a shorter time-to-market. At the same time, nimble adaptation to 
changing requirements can be achieved by investing only in key 
changes of a component-based solution, rather than undertaking a 
major release change. For these reasons, component technology is 
expected by many to be the cornerstone of software production in 
the years to come.  
According to Jacobson, Griss and Jonsson [1], the effectiveness of 
component reuse depends on the connectiveness among them and 
their binding to specific application domains. The connectiveness 
is one of the most discussed problems in CBD [6, 12]. Approaches
that deal with component interfaces
1
(one of premises for
connection between components) focus on their capability to 
provide and request services. Although this interface aspect is 
important in a CBD approach, other problems arise when trying to 
connect components. The connectiveness also depends on the 
execution environment, the heterogeneity of components, the 
distance between them and the architecture that controls their 
connections [1, 5, 12]. The architecture that governs the 
connections between components also depends on the application 
domain.  Therefore, reuse possibilities increase when components 
are bound to domain concepts. As stated by Krueger [1], while 
retrieving reusable software components, it is advantageous to use 
a terminology that is familiar to the domain. This approach 
diverges from other software component retrieval proposals, such 
as the Agora System [6] that bases the search only on the 
component interfaces, covering solely the component 
connectiveness problem, and the RIG initiative [10] that presents 
an approach for domain repository integration with minor user 
transparency and without web access. 
Suppose that, in a typical component retrieval scenario, a software 
developer wants to find software components to use in the 
construction of an application under development. If he does not 
know any other specialized service that provides information 
about components, the natural search space will be the Internet. 
Now, consider that this developer has no knowledge about the 
available components. Thus, the following actions are necessary 
to discover software components that satisfy his needs: 
1.  To locate information about components that can be stored in
distributed repositories. This could be typically done through 
an Internet search engine that takes as input a few keywords 
and returns a list of relevant resource descriptions that might 
be available in these repositories. The success of this task 
directly depends on the interest of the repository 
administrators in publicizing their data and the precision of 
the user while providing the keywords.
2.  To determine usability of search results. Due to the
complexity in the analysis of component usefulness (i.e., 
considering the component domain, functionality and 
connection possibilities based on architecture decisions), the

1
An interface of a component can be seen as a component's part that
defines its access points. These points allow clients (components 
themselves) to access services provided by the component [12].
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
SSR'01, May 18-20, 2001, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 
Copyright 2001 ACM 1-58113-358-8/01/0005...$5.00.

19
information that is available at the component site is 
probably not enough.
Thus, a naive Internet approach will not cope with the complexity 
of software component retrieval. The previous actions require an 
engine that combines the following three characteristics: (i) 
Distribution and Heterogeneity ­ software components can be 
distributed and use different kinds of storage; (ii) Domain 
Ontology - to organize component repositories within a domain in 
order to ease its search; (iii) Software Component Information 
Evolution ­ to insert new information (including legacy 
information).  
However, as stated before, current software component retrieval 
proposals either lack from heterogeneity or domain ontology. On 
the other hand, many database projects [3,4,7,8,9] are particularly 
concerned with distribution, heterogeneity (and ontology) found in 
legacy databases. These projects are known as "multi-database" or 
Heterogeneous and Distributed Data Base Systems (HDDS) [4]. 
One solution found in HDDS is the use of mediators
2
[2]
combined with ontology [14] to integrate, identify and retrieve 
related legacy databases. Ontology in this context can be defined 
as a vocabulary of terms and the relationship between them. For 
each term, a definition must be created, using an informal 
description, some concrete examples in the domain, and also a 
formal specification of the relationships between terms, thus 
forming a semantic network.  
We believe that the HDDS technologies can be adapted to handle 
software component repositories in the place of legacy databases. 
Mediators can represent and integrate domain information 
repositories (distributed and/or heterogeneous). Metadata found in 
mediators can describe the repositories of components, presenting 
the domain, their semantics, software architecture and interfaces. 
Usually a query engine is available in HDDS and therefore ad hoc 
queries over this metadata can be used to analyze the available 
components. The organization of mediators with ontology drives 
the user search along heterogeneous vocabulary. 
Therefore, our main objective is to present a software component 
information retrieval engine named Odyssey Mediation Layer 
(OML) that combines the connectiveness of components and the 
domain concept approach. We address both issues through the 
adoption of mediation [2] and ontology [14] technologies, 
respectively.  
Our approach is motivated by a project that is being conducted in 
the Legislative House domain. There are several applications that 
can benefit from reusable information within this domain and 
from other related ones, such as justice domain, criminal domain, 
among others. Our users are not specialists in the latter domains, 
only in the Legislative domain. However, it is important that 
relevant reusable information from all related domains can be 
presented to them, particularly when they are not aware of its 
existence. Most components of legislative process applications 
can be reused from the legislative domain (e.g., Proposal Creation, 
Legislature Evaluation, Council Members referee, among others), 
but sometimes it is worth looking at components from other 
related domains such as justice domain. Our retrieval engine is 
able to identify and suggest components from other related

2

According to Wiederhold [2], mediators are modules that encompass
layers of mediation services, connecting bases of heterogeneous and 
distributed data (producers) to information systems (consumers).
domains in the same way as it suggests components from the 
Legislative domain. 
With our retrieval engine, the user search can rely on a controlled 
vocabulary (ontology) composed of domain terms that are familiar 
to him. Thus, the search is more focused and executed over 
relevant available component information repositories. Besides, 
the usefulness of the retrieved components is supported by the 
bindings between ontology terms and related components. This 
binding is accomplished by domain specialists together with 
domain engineers during a domain engineering process [5, 17] 
thus enforcing the biding precision. In order to address these 
issues, the retrieval engine organizes component information 
repositories within domain ontologies while preserving its original 
characteristics of distribution and heterogeneity, all in a flexible 
way.  
The main contribution of our proposal is to provide an approach 
for accessing software components through the use of ontologies 
and mediators. Our innovative aspect is to provide flexibility, 
transparency and accuracy in software component information 
retrieval.  
In order to present our approach, the paper is organized as 
follows: Section 2 discusses the novelties of our proposal with 
related works; Section 3 details the architecture of Odyssey 
Mediation Layer; Section 4 shows a component retrieval example; 
and Section 5 presents our concluding remarks.

RELATED WORKS
In a broader approach, several information retrieval systems use 
semantic brokering with respect to their resources. These systems 
include SIMS [3], TSIMMIS [4], InfoMaster [7], and Information 
Manifold [8]. These systems work in the definition of some sort of 
common vocabulary (similar to an ontology) to define objects in 
their domain. Individual information sources that contain these 
objects describe constraints on objects that they can provide, in 
terms of this common vocabulary. The broker then uses these 
constraints to determine how to process queries. These projects 
deal with generic designs for database retrieval. Our approach 
combines the mediation technology with specific domain ontology 
[2] to integrate different software components data sources. The 
main difference between these projects and ours is that our 
approach is particularly concerned with software components. 
Thus, we use an ontology, which is specifically constructed for 
that. This ontology is specified during a Domain Engineering 
process [5] tailored for this purpose. Hence, the ontology accuracy 
is more efficient, and consequently the usefulness of the retrieved 
components.
Another work worth mentioning is the InfoSleuth system[9]. It is 
a large project, conducted by MCC, which uses an ontology 
approach to retrieve information from distributed and 
heterogeneous databases. InfoSleuth can be seen as a framework 
that can be tailored for a given purpose. One interesting 
application is the EDEN project in the environmental domain [9]. 
In this case, some tools of InfoSleuth were customized for this 
project. Our project adopts a similar approach, where our 
constructs are specific for software component information 
retrieval.
The Agora System [6] describes a search engine for retrieving 
reusable code components, such as JavaBeans and CORBA 
components. Agora uses an introspection mechanism for
20
registering code components, through its interface. As a result, this 
information may not be available at a certain time because the 
repository is not running, or the information cannot be located. In 
each of these cases, the interface information cannot be 
successfully retrieved and indexed, and the component is not 
registered in the AGORA index database. In our proposal, the use 
of mediators provides the flexibility to access remote component 
repositories. There is no need for an index phase, and the mediator 
is able to capture updates that may occur in a remote repository 
(i.e., the repository, using the translator
3
services, sends a message
with these updates to the mediator). Moreover, the mediator 
metadata manager has access to all the ontological terms of a 
given domain, facilitating the identification of the existence of a 
component, even if its repository is out of service. In this case, the 
user knows that the component exists and that he can retrieve it 
latter. Moreover, new information is always associated to domain 
terms within a given domain ontology, improving its accessibility 
and reuse.  
Ye and Fischer [18] presents an approach that provides an active 
repository for components. The work emphasizes active delivery 
of reuse information, helping on the identification of components 
that developers did not even know that existed. Regarding this last 
aspect, it is similar to our approach. Our component information 
retrieval system also provides this functionality too, once it 
accesses components from other domains based on semantic 
similarity. The active repository functionality, although not 
described in this paper, is also part of our work [16]. One aspect 
that is different in our proposal is the retrieval of distributed 
information, which is not mentioned in Ye and Fischer's work. 
Another important work to mention is the RIG initiative [9], which 
describes a reuse library interoperability approach. The idea of the 
asset library interoperability is based on the storage of domain 
information in several databases. These databases are static and 
based on a unique global model. The integration requires that 
information is stored according to this unique model. Therefore, if 
any reuse database is to be integrated, it has to be translated to the 
RIG model. Alternatively, the mediation approach creates a new 
level of abstraction above the database model, allowing the insertion 
and/or removal of repositories from the mediation structure without 
the need for updates on the whole structure. Moreover, RIG lacks a 
more effective search engine that provides searches based on 
domain concepts and filtering of relevant information, including 
Internet access, as we do in our work.

SPECIALIZING A MEDIATION ARCHITECTURE TO A COMPONENT INFORMATION RETRIEVAL ENGINE
The effectiveness of a software component information retrieval 
engine is associated to its capacity to handle the distribution and 
heterogeneity of software components, to organize component 
repositories within a domain, and to enable software component 
evolution. These requirements can be accomplished through a 
software layer that is seen as a particular case of HDDS.  
As stated before, mediators are modules that encompass layers of 
mediation services, connecting bases of heterogeneous and 
distributed data (producers) to information systems (consumers). 
Hence, in order to be really useful in software component 
information search this solution has to be tailored to  component

3
A translator in this context is the same as a wrapper or adapter.
information retrieval, considering the component domain, its 
semantics, architecture, and interfaces.  
In a mediation architecture, as new sources of information are 
aggregated to the mediation structure, the amount of information 
to be modeled increases, frequently generating inconsistencies, 
ambiguities, and conflicts in the represented information. One way 
to deal with this problem is to partition the consumers and 
producers' models and the structure of mediation by domain. The 
description of these models, partitioned by domains, forms the so-called
domain ontology [14].  
In the context of component information retrieval, the use of 
mediators allows the information access to be carried 
independently of the format and the operational platform where it 
is stored. Therefore, the structure of a retrieval engine as a whole 
can be flexible, since existing component data sources can be 
added to the architecture in an easy way, with no need to  convert 
from the original information format (format form of 
data/information source) to the format used by the reuse 
environment. Another interesting feature of mediators within a 
component information retrieval engine is that reusable 
information is naturally organized by domain (Figure 1), which 
facilitates the search for domain concepts, since specific domain 
data is accessed in a search. Moreover, the use of mediators allows 
the aggregation of information already stored in legacy databases, 
without the need to transform the original database format.  
In order to help on the correct choice of mediators for a given 
domain, the mediator layer provides a specific ontology for each 
domain. Therefore, this ontology must be specified by domain 
specialists, facilitating the search for specific components, since 
the ontology definition is directly connected to software 
components within the domain. 
The use of this layer in the Legislative Domain is particularly 
interesting, since in Brazil as in other countries [15], there are 
some legislative houses that are more up to date with software 
technology than others. The former represents a reference source 
of software components to several Legislative Houses. Without 
this kind of layer, there exist some barriers for reusing 
components among these houses, such as the distance, scarce 
financial resources, and semantic conflicts among components (a 
common component functionality can be identified differently in 
each legislative house). 
Figure 1 presents an example of a mediation layer configuration 
for this specific application domain. Several mediators are 
presented as sub-domains, such as State Legislative (SL) and 
Municipal Legislative (ML) domains. The SL Mediator is 
aggregated (P1) to ML, generating a more generic mediator that 
combines the two domains. The latter can be used in cases where 
information concerning the two domains is necessary. Each 
mediator is connected to the related domain data sources that 
contain reuse component information. The Justice Domain 
Mediator may be accessed in cases where the user wants 
components related to the Justice domain. 
In order to provide an architecture that is able to handle the 
requirements of component information search and retrieval, we 
specified and implemented OML (Odyssey Mediation Layer) was 
specified and implemented, based on mediation and ontology 
technologies. OML is derived from a HDDS mediator, the 
HIMPAR architecture [12], adding to it more precision and 
semantics, using ontologies tailored to software component 
information retrieval.
21

Retrieval Interface
Legislative
State
Domain Mediator
Justice
Domain
Mediator
Legislative
Domain
Mediator
Legislative
Municipal
Domain
Mediator
P1
P2
ORB
Component
Repository
Translator
Component
Repository
Component
Repository
Translator
P1 : aggregation
P2: association
Translator
Component
Repository
Translator

Figure 1 - An example of a mediation layer for the Legislative domain

User Interface
Service Manager
SM
Query Translator
Query Packer
Query
Decomposition
Query Manager(QM)
Ontology
Model
OntologyManager
Metadata Manager (MM)
Mediator
Translator
Translator
Service Manager
Metadata
Model
ORB Bus
Component Repository
Component Repository
ORB  Bus
Reuse Tools

Figure 2- Architecture of the Odyssey Mediation Layer

The OML engine is part of a reuse environment, named Odyssey, 
that deals with component based development of applications 
within a given domain. Specifically, OML is part of a system of 
agents that helps users in their search for reusable components 
[16]. It uses intelligent mechanisms such as learning techniques 
and user preferences in order to present in advance components 
that the user does not even know that exist. The agent system 
infers this information and presents the components to the user. It 
is important to notice that although OML was built in the context 
of the Odyssey project, it can be used standalone or integrated to 
other tools, since OML offers a user interface (as seen in figures 3
through 8) and a CORBA IDL interface for its communication 
with other tools.
Figure 2 presents OML, which comprises four levels: Interface, 
Mediation Layer, ORB bus, and Translators. The Interface level is 
implemented by the Service Manager (SM), which stores 
metadata about available mediators, and is capable of creating 
ontological bindings between related ontologies in order to query 
several mediation layers. Also, SM is responsible for the creation 
and modification of mediators. The Mediation Layer provides the 
management of each mediator through the Metadata Manager
22
(MM), and provides access to mediators through the Query 
Manager. At the ORB level, communication between the 
mediation layer and translators is established through CORBA 
standard services. Finally, the Translator level provides one 
translator for each component repository in such a way that it can 
participate in the Mediation Layer integration model.
3.1 Service Manager

The Service Manager (SM) stores metadata about mediators, 
translators and data sources availability, and deals with 
ontological commitments between related mediators (domains). 
 Schema 1 presents an overview of SM Metadata in ODL 
notation, and Schema 2 provides the IDL interface to access 
mediators through the CORBA bus.


class Object_Himpar
(  extent Himpares) 
{ 
   attribute string Name; 
} 
 
class Mediator extends Object_Himpar 
(  extent Mediadores) 
{ 
   relationship list&lt;Container&gt; AssociatedDataSources 
    inverse DataSource::Medis; 
   attribute string Description; 
   attribute string KeyWords; 
   relationship list&lt;Mediador&gt; Super 
    inverse Mediador::*; 
   relationship list&lt;Mediador&gt; Spec 
    inverse Mediador::*; 
   relationship list&lt;Mediador&gt; Assoc 
    inverse Mediador::*; 
   attribute string BaseName; 
   relationship list&lt;OntologyTerm&gt; TermRel 
    inverse OntologyTerm::MediadorRel; 
   attribute String password; 
} 
 
 
class Wrapper extends Object_Himpar 
(  extent Wrappers) 
{ 
   attribute string description; 
   attribute string type; 
   relationship list&lt;DataSource&gt; Repositories 
    inverse DataSource::Trad; 
} 
 
class DataSource extends Object_Himpar 
(  extent DataSources) 
{ 
   attribute string owner; 
   relationship list&lt;Mapping&gt; Structure 
    inverse Mapping::Cont; 
   attribute string AbstractionLevel; 
   relationship Wrapper Trad 
    inverse Wrapper::Repositories; 
   relationship list&lt;Mediator&gt; Medis. 
    inverse Mediator:: AssociatedDataSources; 
   attribute String password; 
} 
 
class Mapping 
{ 
   attribute string DataSourceName; 
   attribute string map; 
   relationship DataSource Cont
inverse DataSource::Structure; 
} 
 
class OntologyTerm 
(  extent Terms) 
{ 
   attribute string Name; 
   relationship list&lt;OntologyTerm&gt; Synonym 
    inverse OntologyTerm::*; 
   relationship list&lt; OntologyTerm &gt; Hipernym 
    inverse OntologyTerm::*; 
   relationship list&lt; OntologyTerm &gt; Hiponym 
    inverse OntologyTerm::*; 
   relationship Mediator MediadorRel 
    inverse Mediator: TermRel; 
} 
 
class Component 
(  extent Components) 
{ 
   attribute string type;
}

Schema 1 ­ Metadata of Service Manager
The ontological commitments between related mediators are all 
done at SM level. SM provides the necessary metadata for this, 
using the Mediator, DataSource, Mapping, OntologyTerm and 
Component classes described in Schema2. The decision to 
concentrate all ontological commitments at SM level was mainly 
based on the SM available information. It knows the availability 
of all OML components and thus is able to indicate which domain 
the user could access. In order to use a given mediator within 
OML, the administrator has to register the mediator, its related 
data sources, and translators used by these data sources into SM. 
Figures 3 and 4 present examples of the interfaces for doing this.
module Mediator 
{ 
interface Access { 
struct OntologyTerm { 
  string
Name;
string
Description;
}; 
struct object { 
  string
type;
string
definition;
}; 
typedef sequence&lt;Ontology&gt; ListOntology; 
typedef sequence&lt;object&gt; ListObjects; 
 
// Functions for the management of bases

string open_base (in string basename);


void  close_base (in string basename);
// Functions for the management of ontologies

ListOntology retrieve_Ontology (in string
mediator-name); 
 
// Functions for retrieve components 
                ListObjects queryMediator(in string query);



};
};
Schema 2 ­ SM IDL interface to access mediators
Figure 3 shows some information about the Municipal Legislative 
Mediator within SM. Some basic metadata are: i) the mediator 
name, ii) the executable file that has to be loaded (if it is not 
already loaded) by ORB, in order to respond to some request to 
this specific mediator, iii) the keywords related to the mediator
23
(this information provides a fast and limited knowledge about the 
contents of the mediator), iv) the password required by the 
mediator to attend the request (if necessary), among others. Figure 
4 presents a data source registration, associating a specific data 
source, File System2, to the Municipal Legislative Mediator. We 
may also register the available types of components in order to 
know to which phase of the application development the 
component belongs (analysis, architectural or implementation ­ 
see Figure 8). 
One important characteristic of OML is to use domain ontology to 
search for domain terms and its ontological relationship, within or 
among various domains at different levels of abstraction. Thus, 
SM has to capture the ontological model
4
of each mediator and
associate terms among them. For capturing each ontological 
model, SM uses the ORB bus, through IDL retrieve_Ontology() 
interface method (Schema 2), to access the specific mediator, 
retrieving its ontological terms. Therefore, the ontological model 
provides the main structure for dealing with domain ontology 
relationships. Relationships involve semantic links such as 
Hypernyms, Hyponyms, and Synonyms. A Synonym link 
associates ontological terms in several domains that represent 
synonyms for a particular ontological term. Hypernyms and 
Hyponyms links relate ontological terms from various domains 
that can be either more general or more specific than the current 
one. Thus, it is possible to associate ontological terms from 
multiple domains, providing accessibility for domain information. 
Figure 5 presents the interface for the association of ontological 
terms.  
In a query formulation, SM accesses and retrieves all related 
mediators, searching for component information that fulfills the 
query semantics. The ontological information about requested

4
Each ontological term is specified as a domain term and a detailed
description of it, and relationships with other ontological terms, at 
different levels of abstraction, are created (see section 3.2)

domains is transferred by the Broker (ORB) to the proper domain 
(mediator), using the method queryMediator (in string query), and 
correct ontological domain terms.
In the example shown, SM will query all mediators that are related 
to the Municipal Legislative mediator. Thus, SM will transmit the 
query to the Legislative Domain Mediator and Justice Domain 
Mediator (see Figure 2). The retrieved components and their 
corresponding match levels are shown, if each retrieved 
component exactly matches the query or if the component
Figure 3 ­ A Mediator Registration Example

Figure 4 ­ A data source registration example

24
partially attends the request. OML registers this information and 
presents how well the component attends the request (total or 
some percentage ­ in the latter case).  In section 4, we present a 
more concrete example of this kind of query.
3.2 Mediator Manager
Each mediator has its own metadata. This metadata represents the 
ontological model of the domain. The Mediator manager (MM) 
also stores relationships among the ontological terms and 
components stored in data sources. This metadata provides the 
capability to retrieve components related to this mediator 
(domain). In order to provide this feature, MM also stores the 
ontology metadata related to this domain. For each ontological 
domain term, it is necessary to register its name, its type (in this 
specific case a term that represents a functionality in the domain), 
its importance within the domain and the related domain terms. 
These terms permit the expansion of the query range within the 
domain, i.e., if there is no component information on data sources 
related to this specific ontological term, OML could query related 
ontological terms in the same domain. Of course, this "shift" must 
be reported to the user.
In order to relate each ontological term with its counterparts in 
data sources, MM retrieves related information of data sources 
from SM, using the ORB bus. The retrieved information is used 
by MM to locate and retrieve software components from data 
sources. Thus, we can associate each ontological term with its 
related components, with the help of a specific translator.
A RETRIEVAL EXAMPLE USING OML
Consider a user who is developing an application to handle new 
legislative proposals, among other characteristics, in the legislative 
domain. He wants to know if he can use pre-existing software 
components in his application. Thus, he can use the OML user 
interface to know about the availability of this kind of 
components, and to retrieve some candidates.
In our example (Figure 6), data source 2 has a binary software 
component called "New Subject", and data source 1 has a Java 
package (set of related classes) named "Proposal Creation". Both 
data sources were mapped into the Legislative Municipal Domain 
Mediator. Therefore, the Justice Domain mediator has an ontology 
term named Justice Code that is mapped to a component named 
Code Database.
These components are made available to the Legislative 
Municipal Domain through the ontological term in the mediator 
called "Creation of New Proposals", and are mapped to the above 
components in data sources, i.e., data sources 1 and 2.
During the creation of new proposals within a Municipal 
Legislative House, there are some cases when it is necessary to 
consult justice database rules. This justice database can impose 
some restrictions on a new proposal creation.
Figure 5 ­ Multiple Ontology Association

25

When the Municipal Legislative Mediator was registered, the SM 
administrator associated this mediator with the Justice Mediator. 
This Justice Mediator provides software components used for the 
development of applications in the Justice domain. Thus, when 
our user accesses the SM interface in order to retrieve components 
related to the creation of new proposals, he can choose to access 
information from all related mediators, i.e., generic mediators, 
specific mediators, associated mediators or all of them. Suppose
our user decides to retrieve information from the Legislative 
Mediator and associated mediators, then he will access 
components from the Legislative Mediator and Justice Mediator 
(see Figure 2). The formulation of the query (Figure 7), selecting 
the type of component to be retrieved (components belong to 
analysis, architectural, codification or all phases of development), 
and the result of this query is presented in Figure 8. Note that for 
each component, a description of the retrieval is presented (in

Data Source 1
Data Source 2

Mediator Manager

ORB

Justice   Rules
Proposal Creation
New Subject
Data Source 3

Rule Database

Mediator Manager

Creation of New 
Proposals
Service Manager

Creation of 
New Proposals
Hyponym
Justice
Rules

Figure 6 ­ Retrieval Schema Example


Figure 7 ­ Query Formulation

26
Figure 8, the description presented is related to the Rule Database 
Access component) and the user can select one or more 
components to retrieve.
Through the mediation structure, OML users can search for 
components in a transparent and uniform way. In the above 
example, users of OML do not have to know where components 
are stored. Moreover, users do not have to query all component 
repositories, using each specific repository query language format 
(when a query language exists) to find where the needed 
components are stored. They do not even have do know how to 
access data sources.
The complexity for dealing with these heterogeneous repositories 
is treated by OML. Without this layer, users would have to handle 
these repositories individually, increasing the complexity of the 
query and access. By using mediators, users can query specifically 
the mediation metadata, using one single model. The mappings 
between mediator metadata and translators redirect and 
decompose the query to data sources 1, 2, and 3. Also, the 
identification of components of the same domain that are in 
different repositories can be detected at the time of their 
registration in the mediation layer. Afterwards this is all 
transparent to users.

CONCLUSIONS
This work addresses the interoperability problem between 
component information repositories. An integration layer was 
developed to help searching and identifying suitable reuse 
components. This layer is based on mediators and ontologies to 
provide the binding of different components to their domain 
concepts. To assist the identification of related components and 
their appropriate domain organization, each mediator encloses one 
domain ontology and provides the mapping to their respective 
repository of components.
Mediators provide a uniform view of the available components 
organized in domain taxonomy. Domain ontologies are used to 
help searching for reusable components information through the 
representation of domain semantic concepts. Therefore, this 
mediation layer promotes domain information integration and 
provides mechanisms to translate component requests across 
ontologies. The important aspect of our proposal is the use of 
domain ontologies, for reusable component retrieval, in a concrete 
situation, allowing users to express component requests at a higher 
level of abstraction when compared to keyword based access or 
component interface based access used in other proposals. 
Without OML, users would have to access directly various 
repositories, dealing with specific characteristics of each 
repository. Therefore, the main contribution of this paper is to 
show the potential of the technology of mediators, together with 
ontology models, for dealing with components repositories 
complexities, and organizing the manipulation of different 
components within a domain ontology.  Although, the mediation 
technology is quite popular within HDDS, its adaptation using 
domain ontologies for component information retrieval is 
innovative.
OML is an operational interoperability architecture based on the 
use of mediators, translators, and a CORBA communication 
protocol, which is responsible for the connection among 
translators and mediators in a distributed and heterogeneous 
environment. It was constructed using the C++ language together 
with the Visibroker ORB for C++. Currently, OML is being 
extended in order to publish and search for components on the 
Internet [19], based on XML standard.

References
[1]
Jacobson, I.; Griss, M.; Jonsson, P. : "Software Reuse: 
Architecture, Process and Organization for Business 
Success;" Addison Wesley Longman, May 1997.

Figure 8 ­ Example of component information retrieval in OML

27
[2]   Wiederhold, Gio; Jannink, Jan: "Composing Diverse
Ontologies;" 8th Working Conference on Database 
Semantics (DS-8), Rotorua, New Zealand (DS-8) January 
1999 (Final version to be published by 
IFIP/Kluwer/Chapman&Hall).
[3]
Arens Y., Knoblock C.A., and Shen W.: Query
reformulation for dynamic information integration. 
Journal of Intelligent Information Systems, 6(2):99­130, 
1996.
[4]
Molina, Garcia and et.al. :The TSIMMIS approach to 
mediation: Data models and languages. Journal of 
Intelligent Information System, 8(2), 1997.
[5]   Braga, R.; Mattoso, M.; Werner, C.: "The Use of
Mediators for Component Retrieval in a Reuse 
Environment," In: Proc. Technology of Object-Oriented 
Languages and Systems Conference (TOOLS-30 
USA'99), IEEE CS Press, Santa Barbara, pp.542-546, 
August 1999.
[6]
Seacord, R.; Hissan, S.; Wallnau, K,: "Agora: A Search 
Engine for Software Components," Technical Report 
CMU/SEI-98-TR-011, August 1998.
[7]
Genesereth M.R., Keller A., and Duschka O.M.:
Infomaster: An Information Integration System. In 
SIGMOD RECORD, Proceedings of the 97 ACM 
SIGMOD International Conference on Management of 
Data, pp. 539­542, Tucson-Arizona, 1997.
[8]
Levy, Alon Y., Rajaraman, Anand, and Ordille, Joann J.: 
Querying heterogeneous information sources using source 
descriptions. In Proceedings of the 22nd VLDB 
Conference, pp. 251­262, Mumbai (Bombay), India, 
1996.
[9]
Fowler, Jerry, Perry, Brad, Nodine, Marian, and
Bargmeyer, Bruce: Agent-Based Semantic Interoperability 
in InfoSleuth , SIGMOD Record 28(1): pp. 60-67, 1999.
[10]
RIG; "Reusable Library Interoperability Group" at
http://www.asset.com/rig/, 1996.
[11]   Pires, P.; Mattoso, M.: "A CORBA based architecture for
heterogeneous information source interoperability;" 
Proceedings of Technology of Object-Oriented Languages 
and Systems - TOOLS'25, IEEE CS Press, pp.33-49, 
November 1997.
[12]   Szyperski, C.: Component Software: Beyond Object
Oriented Programming, Addison Wesley, 1998
[13]  Ram, S.: "Guest Editor's Introduction: Heterogeneous
Distributed Database Systems,"; IEEE Computer, Vol. 24 
No.12, December 1991.
[14]  Nieto, E. M.: OBSERVER: An Aproach for Query
Processing in Global Information Systems based on 
Interoperation across Pre-existing Ontologies, Doctoral 
Thesis, Universidade de Zaragoza, November 1998.
[15] Weinstein, P. C.: Ontology-based Metadata:
Transforming the MARC Legacy, Proceedings of the 1998 
ACM 7
th
Internacional Conference on Information and
Knowledge Management, pp. 52-59, 1998.
[16]  Braga, R.; Mattoso, M.; Werner, C.: "Using Ontologies
for Domain Information Retrieval," in DEXA 2000 DomE 
Workshop, pp.100-104, September 2000.
[17]  Braga, R.; Werner, C.; Mattoso, M.: "Odyssey: A Reuse
Environment based on Domain Models"; In: Proceedings 
of IEEE Symposium on Application-Specific Systems and 
Software Engineering Technology(ASSET'99), IEEE CS 
Press, Richardson, Texas, pp.50-57, March 1999.
[18]
Ye, Y.; Fischer, G.: "Promoting Reuse with Active Reuse 
Repository Systems," IEEE ICSR 2000, Vienna, pp.302-317
, June 2000
[19]
Pinheiro, R.; Costa, M.; Braga, R.; Mattoso, M; Werner, 
C.; "Software Components Reuse Through Web Search 
and Retrieval", Proceedings of the International 
Workshop on Information Integration on the Web - 
Technologies and Applications, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 
2001 (to appear).





5
Each ontological term is specified as a domain term and a detailed
description of it, and relationships with other ontological terms, at 
different levels of abstraction, are created (see section 3.2)

28
