An Index System for Quality Synthesis Evaluation of BtoC Business Website
ABSTRACT
It is important for successful electronic business to have a 
hi-quality business website. So we need an accurate and 
effective index system to evaluate and analyses the quality of 
the business website. In this paper, the evaluation index system 
following the `grey box' principle is proposed which considers 
both efficiency of business website and performance of 
electronic business system. Using R-Hierarchical clustering 
method to extract the typical indexes from sub-indexes is 
theoretically proved to have a rationality and effectiveness. 
Finally, the evaluation method is briefly discussed.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
TP393.4

INTRODUCTION
Business website is an online media between buyer and seller. 
A hi-quality website is crucial to a company for a successful 
e-business. What is a hi-quality business website? In terms of 
maintaining the website, what do we focus on so that the quality 
meets the users' needs? Apparently, using click-through rate to 
assess the popularity cannot objectively and accurately evaluate 
the quality of the business websites. Instead, we need to rely on 
scientific evaluation index system and methods.
At present, there are many methods available for business 
website comparison or ranking, such as Usage Ranking, 
Purchase Comparison, Expert Opinion and Synthesis 
Evaluation etc. You can find both official authority and 
non-governmental organization that issue their power ranking. 
The former one is to monitor and regulate the market, such as 
CNNIC, which organized the competition for the Top Ten 
Websites in domestic. The latter one, such as Consumerreports 
(
www.consumerreports
. org
), BizRate(www.bizrate.com),
Forrester Research etc., is mainly to guide the web users' 
activity. These kinds of comparison or ranking have special 
value in getting reputation and increasing recognition of the 
business websites among the users, however, e-business 
enterprise can not improve the quality of their websites directly
based on the results of these kinds of assessments.
The main purpose of this paper is to develop an index system 
for quantitative evaluation of the BtoC websites, which dose not 
emphasize the income of the website but focus on evaluating of 
its synthesis quality. We hope that the applying of this index 
system will provide the technique developers and maintainers 
some references for designing, appraising and diagnosing their 
e-business system to improve its quality level, and to support 
managers to make decisions for operation of the websites.

OVERVIEW OF PREVIOUS STUDIES
Comparing to the fast growing of e-business websites in the 
world, currently we can rarely find the particular research on 
the evaluation index system of business website. QEM (The 
website quality evaluation method) proposed by Olsina and 
Godoy etc. in 1999 can be considered as one of the 
representative approaches. It based on the main factors to 
evaluate the quality of the websites, including functionality 
(global search, navigability, and content relativity), usability 
(website map, addresses directory), efficiency and reliability. In 
2000, American researcher, Panla Solaman, presented 
e-SERVQUAL model based on the conventional service quality 
evaluation model SERVQUAL. It contains some factors like 
efficiency, deal completeness, reliability, privacy protection, 
responsiveness, recompense and contact etc. In the same year, 
another American researcher, Hauler, introduced an e-QUAL 
model which includes the factors of content, accessibility, 
navigability, design and presentation, responsiveness, 
background, personalization and customization, etc. In 2004, 
F.J. Miranda Gonzalez and T.M.Banegil Palacios developed an 
universal evaluation index system WIS (Web Assessment Index) 
that can be employed to assess websites by different 
organizations. It consists of four indexes of accessibility, 
navigability, speed and content.
[1]
However, the universal index
system cannot measure a website exactly and absolutely due to 
the industry specialty, organizational characteristics and 
different usages. One of the representative researches is Mr. 
ZhongHai Li's paper about ergonomics standard of online store. 
It assesses the business websites by testing if the design of the 
website coincides with the shopping process of online 
consumers. This standard has five factors, such as search and 
browse, merchandise information, shopping cart, register and 
pay, service and support.
[4]
Another index system for small and
medium business websites covers the factors of general features, 
design, promotion, information and the others.
[5]

Here we list our major findings from the previous researches:

2.1  Unreasonable Selection of the Index
Some research consider not only the original design but also the 
factors such as promotion and income of business website.
75
Some evaluation systems have correlative or contradictive 
indexes. For example, it considers the download speed, at the 
same time, it requires the web designers not to excessively use 
flash and sounds to slow down the speed.
2.2 Unilateral Evaluation
Most of the research takes the users' view to evaluate the 
function and design of website. It treats the business system as a 
`black box' and ignores the impact of system performance on 
the websites quality. But considering the factors of system 
performance alone is also not a complete evaluation for 
improving service quality of website.
2.3 Lack of a Complete Set of Quality
Synthesis Evaluation System
A complete set of tool to evaluate the websites must include the 
following important elements: categories, factors, weights, 
rankings standard and assessment model. So far, we have not 
seen any literature discussing complete set of evaluation index 
system aiming at the quality of BtoC websites.

PRINCIPLE FOR THE QUALITY SYNTHESIS EVALUATION
First, the three fundamental principles we need to follow are to 
be comprehensive, to be scientific and to be feasible. We should 
evaluate all the facets of the website from different dimensions 
and avoid missing value of important factors. Moreover, the 
definition of the evaluation index should be accurateobjective 
and logical so it can eliminate the impact on the evaluation 
result brought by the correlative indexes. Concurrently, we need 
reduce the quantity of indexes or adopt the simple ones which 
data is easier to be collected, and prevent from complicated 
calculation due to the excessive indexes.
The main purpose of improving business websites is to serve 
the users better. They are concerned only about the websites' 
external attributes, such as content, function, presentation and 
browse speed, etc. So, evaluating only by taking their views 
cannot directly guide to develop, maintain and administrate the 
website. Just like treating the patient's symptom but not the 
disease itself, the technique developer or maintainer cannot 
radically improve the quality of their websites by correcting 
system structure and web design according to the evaluation 
result. Only after we adopt the `grey box' index system that 
considers both efficiency of business website and performance 
of e-business system, we can establish a quality synthesis 
evaluation index system to benefit the management of BtoC 
websites.

QUALITY EVALUATION INDEXES FOR BUSINESS WEBSITE
Selection of index items lays down the foundation for 
constructing evaluation index system. After we thoroughly 
analyze the evaluation objectives based on the characteristics of 
business website, we propose an initial index system includes 5 
categories and totally 28 index items shown in the following 
Table 1.
Table 1    Quality evaluation indexes for business
websites
Categories Indexes
Function
Effectiveness
1

Integrative Function
2

Interactive Function
3

Convenience
4

Service Personalization
5

Website Credibility
6

Business Authorization
Business
Information
7

Accuracy
8

Authoritativeness
9

Variety in Type
10

Inclusiveness
11

Uniqueness
12

Orderliness
13

Timeliness
14

Variety in Search Method
15

Search Effectiveness
16

Version Internationalization
Website
Design
17

User Interface Friendliness
18

Development Standardization
19

Website Uniqueness
20

Columns Originality
21

Website Structure Clarity
22

Page Style Consistency
23

Harmonization
System
Usability
24

System Stableness
25

Compatibility
26

System Security
27

Self-adaptability
System
Efficiency
28

System Speediness

Website self-adaptability refers to capability of e-business 
system intelligently providing personalized service and 
dynamic optimizing system performance. System Efficiency 
refers to the ability that the system response quickly to the 
requests of numbers of web users. It can be measured through 
values of some quantitative indexes, such as response time, 
throughput or utilization rate, etc.

OPTIMIZING THE EVALUATION INDEXES
It is necessary for our initial evaluation system to optimize if it 
can be applied in practice. First, the indexes are more or less 
correlative which will affects the objectiveness of the 
evaluation. Second, there are too more indexes that will result 
in lower efficiency. Therefore, we try to extract and simplify 
the indexes by using R-Hierarchical clustering method.
Generally, R indicates the coefficient of correlation between 
two items. R-Hierarchical clustering method is usually applied 
to cluster the indexes. The steps are described as following.
5.1  Calculate Coefficient of Correlation and
Clustering
It firstly treats every index as one cluster. So, we have 28 
clusters. Then, coefficient of correlation is calculated between 
every two clusters by minimum-distance method. Next, the two 
clusters with the maximal coefficient of correlation are 
clustered into a new one. The same process is repeated until all 
the indexes are clustered into one.
76
5.2 Analyze the Clustering Process and
Determine Clusters
We analyze the variation of minimum coefficient of correlation 
during the clustering process to find the leap points. According 
to the number of leap points and the knowledge of special field, 
we can eventually determine how many clusters we need. The 
whole process is illustrated in the following Figure 1.


Figure 1 The process of R-Hierarchical clustering
Following the principle of simplification and feasibility and 
considering the characteristics of BtoC website, we cluster the 
28 index items into 10. The precision rate is over 0.75.
5.3 Calculate Correlation Index and Extract the
Representative Indexes
First, we calculate the correlation index that is the average of R 
between one index and every other index in the same cluster.
1
2
2
=

j
j
m
r
R

mi in this formula is the number of the indexes in the cluster 
that index Xj belongs to.
Then, we select the index with the maximal correlation index in 
the total 10 clusters individually and identify 10 of them as the 
most representative indexes.
Finally, the weights of the indexes are derived by the expert 
grade method. The final indexes and their weights are shown in 
the following table 2.

Table 2 The final indexes and their weights
Category Weight
Index
Weight
1.1 Service Personalization
0.10
Function
Effectiveness

0.22  1.2 Website Credibility
0.12
2.1 Information Inclusiveness
0.10
Business
Information

0.18  2.2 Version Internationalization 0.08
3.1 Columns Originality
0.09
Website
Design

0.28  3.2 Website Structure Clarity
0.10
3.3 Harmonization
0.09
4.1 System Stableness
0.10
System
Usability

0.22 4.2 System Security
0.12
System
Efficiency
0.10 5.1 System Speediness
0.10
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed an index system for quality 
synthesis evaluation and diagnosis of the BtoC websites 
following the `Grey Box' evaluation principle, and 
scientifically determined and simplified the index items.
Usually, factor analysis or principal component analysis is used 
to solve the problem of common-factor and multiple indexes. 
But these methods are only suitable for the quantitative indexes, 
and the evaluation process is not truly simplified. Because the 
new index is the linear function of some original ones, it still 
needs to calculate the value of new indexes by collecting all the 
values of the original ones.
In our index system, most of index is descriptive one. So we 
have finalized the indexes by using the R-Hierarchical 
clustering method. It really has reduced the number of the 
evaluation indexes without losing the major information from 
the original indexes. Furthermore, it has effectively avoided the 
impact of common-factors on the evaluation result.
Only the index of system efficiency can be measured through 
quantitative sub-indexes such as response time, etc. Most of 
depictive indexes are subjective and fuzzy. In view of this, we 
should use fuzzy comprehensive analysis method to evaluate to 
get more efficiency result.
In our future work we are intended to propose an evaluation 
model and conduct evaluation to some famous domestic BtoC 
websites to prove if this index system is scientific and feasible. 
Moreover, we will improve this set of index system including 
evaluation model to make the whole set of index system more 
feasibility.

REFERENCES
[1] F.J. Miranda Gonzalez, T.M. Banegil Palacios,
Quantitative evaluation of commercial web sites: an 
empirical study of Spanish firms, International Journal of 
Information Management, 24(2004)313-328
[2]  Chang Liu, Kirk P. Amett, Exploring the factors associated
with Web site success in the context of electronic 
commerce, Information & Management , 38 (2000)
23-33
[3] Evans, J. R., & King, V. E.. Business-to-business
marketing and the World Wide Web: Planning, managing 
and assessing web sites. Industrial Marketing Management, 
28(1999)343­358
[4]  Zhonghai Li, Jianqiao Liao, Hui Xiao; the analyze of work
efficiency on webshop design in China; human work 
efficiency; 4(2002)  43-45
[5]  Research a index system for evaluation of on enterprise
website,
http://www.365un.com/
xmb/viewthread.php?tid=1
998

77

